# CATCH: The Mutual Housing Umbrella and the Birth of the Co-op

**Source:** https://www.spunk.org/texts/misc/sp001302.txt

---

CATCH: The Mutual Housing Umbrella and the Birth of the Co-op
A Report from the Bloomington Trenches
by Joseph Average

 Snouts in the trough, or How to screw people over and live to tell =20

=09In the Winter of 93-94, what had been for twelve years a hush-hush=20
"problem" in Bloomington erupted into a full-blown crisis. Suddenly, the=
=20
city government and local Real Estate developers were scrambling to pass th=
e=20
blame and the buck for what had been a decade and a half of deregulated=20
freeloading. Snouts buried in the trough of tax abatements, Federal Home=
=20
Funds, and Community Development Block Grants (CDBGs), the avaricious=20
pigs had grown corpulent during the Reagan years, to the detriment not only=
=20
of low income families and homeless people, but to the overall quality of l=
ife=20
in the community. =20
=09A study done jointly by the state and local housing agencies found that,=
=20
not surprisingly, Bloomington has the greatest lack of affordable housing i=
n=20
Indiana--more than Gary, Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, and Evansville. Now, in=
=20
light of a recent Federal Report ranking Bloomington-Monroe County as the=
=20
11th poorest metropolitan statistical area in the nation, as well as the ca=
pping=20
of the three-year Section 8 waiting list, and the devastating Wetterau and=
=20
Thompson plant closings, Real Estate developers and city officials are=20
sweating bullets. =20
=09But the final straw came this Spring, when a consortium of greedy=20
developers calling themselves "Pinnacle Properties" bought out the last=20
vestige of low-income housing in downtown Bloomington: the Allen=20
Building. Home to a diverse array of families and individuals, old and=20
young, townies and students, artists and musicians, anarchists and surreali=
sts,=20
the Allen building was a microcommunity in itself--and a stick in the craw =
of=20
the mayor's office, which has been hell-bent on driving out anything withou=
t=20
a credit card and some purchasing power. It was, in fact, the last bulwark=
 of=20
what was once a vibrant and diverse public culture in the heart of the city=
. =20
=09The rest of that culture had been swept out by gentrification=20
throughout the 80s, forced to move either to the periphery of town or out o=
f=20
town altogether. Now the Allen Building is being renovated into high-
income student and professional housing, designed for people who can shop=
=20
in the costly, effete clothing stores that replaced Bloomington Hardware,=
=20
Harriman's News Stand, and a host of other local institutions which had=20
served a broad sector of the community.
=09Many homeless people stayed in the Allen Building because the=20
shelters were overflowing with the refugees of urban renewal. Poor familie=
s,=20
individuals, and homeless folks depend on close proximity to the downtown=
=20
area where most of the jobs and human services are located. Unable to affo=
rd=20
cars, and given the horrendous condition of public transportation in town,=
=20
they have been mightily stiffed by the rich and powerful. =20
=09Students bore the brunt of the early blame; indeed, the presence of=20
35,000 students in a town of the same size creates monumental competition=
=20
for slots in the housing stock. Indiana University is partly to blame for =
its=20
atrocious lack of housing contingencies: no student housing has been built=
=20
since the early 70s, and the administration maintains a dry-campus law whic=
h=20
encourages students to move off campus as soon as possible. And to be sure=
,=20
most students are oblivious to their role as pawns in the gentrification ga=
me=20
and in the destruction and disintegration of neighborhoods.
=09But in the end, the blame must rest squarely on the shoulders of the=20
profiteers and their supporting lackeys in the city, state, and federal=20
governments. "Our" city government has been so overwhelmingly favorable=20
to business interests that nearly 99% of all the present City Council's=20
resolutions have been in the favor of developers. In other words, ask and =
ye=20
shall receive. Aside from council resolutions, the Housing Code enforcemen=
t =20
has been nil for low income housing throughout the 70s and 80s, due=20
primarily to the political connections of developers. Code is used in=20
Bloomington--as elsewhere--as a weapon against the poor, not as a set of=20
protections, and this was no more in evidence than when the city=20
government proposed to use the code violations of the Allen Building to=20
condemn the structure and kick out the residents so as to avoid paying=20
relocation costs. =20
=09These are the people to blame, city officials and private developers. =
=20
They are the ones profiting--whether economically or politically--from poor=
=20
peoples' misery. They point to the market as if it has a life of its own=
=20
independent of the morality of its users, as if they were COMPELLED to=20
charge enormously high rents that favored multiple-income student=20
arrangements while squeezing poor and even moderate-income families to=20
the geopolitical margins. =20
=09But when they took on the Allen building, they challenged a group of=20
people who were already fed up with the destruction of neighborhoods=20
through gentrification. Nothing changed from 1993 to 1994 in terms of the=
=20
actual scope of the housing "problem," except that now voices were being=20
raised, and the "problem" could graduate to a "crisis" whose dimensions and=
=20
origins would be part of public discussion. No longer could political hack=
s=20
and rich developers hide behind silence: people from all walks of life wer=
e=20
speaking up and articulating diverse concerns and interpretations into a=20
substantial critique. Finally, a lengthy cover-story appeared in the Janua=
ry=20
issue of the Bloomington Voice, a local alternative weekly, titled=20
"Bloomington Gentrified," and the city was awash in the rhetoric of crisis.=
 =20

So we're getting screwed: now what?

=09I wrote that article, on behalf of the residents of the Allen Building,=
=20
where I had also lived for a time. From that moment on, many of us felt th=
at=20
we could not turn back, and that though we were to lose the Allen Building,=
=20
we would organize to find workable solutions that would blend our anti-
profit, anti-capitalist and grass roots ideals with pragmatic strategies fo=
r=20
creating affordable housing. =20
=09Many of us have squatted in other cities, but recognize that squatting=
=20
depends on the prevalence of neighborhoods or regions where the housing=20
stock is economically "dead" or comatose. No such opportunities exist in=
=20
Bloomington; developers keep a tight grip on properties and check up on=20
them regularly, even if they are unoccupied. Thus, we had to look to other=
=20
strategies which would be locally appropriate. Taking our cue from success=
es=20
in Madison, Wisconsin, we decided that co-operative housing was our best=20
bet.
=09 In January of 1994 we formed a non-profit, grass roots community=20
development corporation dedicated to establishing affordable co-operative=
=20
housing in Bloomington on a large scale. CATCH (Citizens Acting Together=
=20
for Co-operative Housing), as we envisioned it, would act as a mutual=20
housing association that could leverage public and private monies to buy=20
properties, which we would then develop into co-operatives. By eliminating=
=20
the profit variable in the housing equation, an affordable stock of housing=
=20
could emerge through co-operative arrangements.=20
=09How, then, have we gone about the nuts and bolts of organizing a=20
mutual housing association? What ancillary projects have we landed=20
ourselves in through this process? =20

Towards the nut, bolt, and wrench of a solution: structure, outreach, and=
=20
municipal intervention

=09Perhaps the most important question to answer has been that of=20
strategy: how do we, as an organization, take on this mammoth problem? =20
Do we adopt an ingratiating approach so as to grease the egos of city=20
bureaucrats who hand out entitlements (and lose our self-respect and that o=
f=20
our community)? Do we hit head on with biting attacks on the municipal=20
government and real estate developers, risking any opportunities to actuall=
y=20
accomplish something solid? =20
=09We partially answered these questions through the structure,=20
temperament, and composition of our group. First, in order to get underway=
,=20
we formulated a platform statement and a mission statement, as well as a se=
t=20
of by-laws, in order to incorporate and apply for non-profit status. The b=
enefit=20
of incorporation is the same for a grass roots organization as it is for a=
=20
transnational enterprise: limited liability. No individual in a corporati=
on=20
can be sued for damages or held accountable for failure to make payments. =
In=20
such cases, the corporation itself dissolves but the individuals will not l=
ose=20
their livelihoods in the process--a crucial benefit for groups like ours,=
=20
composed of poor, homeless, and low-income people. Next we applied for a=
=20
501(c)3 designation as a charitable organization. 501(c)3, or non-profit s=
tatus,=20
confirms our commitment to never profit off of housing, and qualifies us fo=
r=20
all kinds of grants, low-interest loans, and tax credits. Moreover, any=20
structures we buy will be exempt from property and other taxes. Finally, w=
e=20
constructed a set of by-laws, required for incorporation and tax exemption,=
=20
and a good idea for fail-safing the organization to insure that its origina=
l=20
mission be respected and adhered to.
=09Hardwiring the by-laws against the intervention of profiteers or special=
=20
interests was a lengthy but worthwhile process. In order to maintain our=
=20
mission as non-profit housing developers for ourselves and other poor=20
people who become involved, we wrote in an income-ceiling clause which=20
can only be waved by consensus. We created a board of directors because it=
 is=20
required by law, but subverted the law by making everyone who joins the=20
group a board member. We created board officers, again required by law, bu=
t=20
subverted the legal intent by disempowering them to the status of=20
functionaries with special duties. In practice, tasks will be shared by ev=
eryone,=20
while officers do the grunt maintenance. =20
=09Finally we brainstormed nearly every kind of decisions that would=20
have to be made, and assigned a method of decision-making to each=20
concomitant with its weight and importance. The methods include: =20
consensus, 2/3 majority, simple majority, and delegation/autonomous. In=20
this way, we can avoid the pitfalls of trying to make every decision by=20
consensus, but can reserve consensus-building for truly momentous=20
decisions. As part of the by-laws, this will insure a smooth and coherent =
and=20
concise decision-making process throughout the life of the organization.
=09Next we chose a member to be our executive director, our public figure=
=20
and spokesperson, our lifeline to municipal and state agencies and bureaus.=
 =20
Cheryl Damron, a dynamic powerhouse and schmooz artist extraordinaire, is=
=20
the executive director for CATCH. This means that she is our (not-as-yet)=
=20
paid staff who we, the board, hire to do all of our dirty work. Of course =
we all=20
pitch in for the grant-writing, researching, and so forth, but Cheryl is ou=
r chief=20
liaison and front for our group. Besides, very few of us are capable of ta=
lking=20
with city bureaucrats and real estate pigs without losing our temper and=20
wanting to string them up! Cheryl does that talking for us. I highly=20
recommend that every municipally-oriented organization have a Cheryl=20
Damron!
=09Having an executive director has solved a lot of our problems of tack=20
and approach. Cheryl represents us publicly, and endures the day-to-day=20
negotiations and meeting work with the city officials, state authorities, a=
nd=20
various other agencies. Her approach is tactful but never snivelling, dire=
ct=20
and to the point, headstrong but never jeopardizing. This frees the rest o=
f us=20
up to do unilateral work against gentrification, to develop literature and=
=20
flyers and pamphlets against profit-based development, and to generally=20
enhance the already existing anti-rent sentiment in our community through=
=20
dissemination and organization. We can take these actions as individuals,=
=20
we can write and speak out fiercely as individuals, without having to=20
represent CATCH as an organization. It makes for a clear and delineated=20
relationship between the individual and the collective. =20
=09Our basic strategy for creating the conditions within which affordable=
=20
co-operative housing can exist has been through municipal intervention. =20
We take the upper hand in defining the scope and nature of the housing=20
crisis, we counter the US Housing and Urban Development department's=20
definition of "affordable" with one that is locally appropriate and locally=
=20
contextualized, we place our feet in the doors of the city agencies and=20
departments, we insert ourselves into the business and the process of=20
municipal development in order to buy ourselves both breathing room and=20
funding, and to make our critiques of development and our solutions part o=
f=20
public discussion. Moreover, we always insist that the issue of private=20
enrichment of real estate developers from municipal funds is an ongoing=20
public issue.
=09The strategy of municipal intervention has brought us into conflict and=
=20
negotiation with city officials on a number of issues surrounding the housi=
ng=20
crisis. These include: parking and traffic, zoning, human service funding=
,=20
work and labor, and perhaps the biggest one--economic development. In=20
sum, most of CATCH's work amongst our community and with/against the=20
city machinery comes down to the very basic set of issues that the British=
=20
anarchist writer Colin Ward foretells: urban planning and design. =20
=09Drawing on Ward's work on housing and design, as well as economist=20
Herman Daley's writings on steady-state economics, and inserting ourselves=
=20
into the business of the city at all points possible, we have articulated b=
road=20
critiques of standard capitalist development schemes--which we are working=
=20
now to make public. We are steadfastly critiquing some of the sacred cows =
of=20
the protectionist market, the racket of capital, and providing our own=20
practical solutions for organizing political-economic arrangements and=20
fostering parallel or counter-institutions. These include everything from=
=20
starting up co-operative workplaces and child care centers, to plowing=20
community gardens, expanding green space, creating community food=20
processing shops, organizing rotating credit pools as capital outlay, manda=
ting=20
rent control and compact urban form (no-growth policies), starting=20
neighborhood consumer co-ops and low-level food production and=20
distribution networks, developing low-capital alternative energy=20
technologies, preventative health care clinics staffed by lay practitioners=
 and=20
midwives, and Community Sponsored Agriculture programs. =20
=09Most importantly, we are recommending that these efforts be co-
ordinated and integrated democratically, and designed and implemented by=20
non-governmental organizations comprised of people who will be direct=20
beneficiaries, rather than by city officials, profiteers, and other so-call=
ed=20
development experts. Basically, then, we are making a public insistence=20
across the board that the process of community "development" and=20
organization be opened up to broad sectors of society, and that avenues be=
=20
created everywhere possible for people to become involved and contribute=20
their intelligence, energy, and sweat. =20

Economics and much more in the co-operative challenge

=09With the funds leveraged from city monies, we plan to use CATCH, as=20
a municipal housing association, to buy properties and turn them one-by-one=
=20
into co-operatives. This entails the development of succinct, complex, and=
=20
detailed mortgage plans and other financial contingencies. For example, on=
e=20
of the benefits of co-ops is that, rather than pay into the coffers of gree=
dy=20
scumbag real estate speculators and landlords, the co-op dweller pays into =
her=20
own equity, which represents a share of the total mortgage. Each co-op has=
 to=20
work out for itself how equity is paid out, but what CATCH will recommend=
=20
will be a 2-year minimum commitment, before which time if a co-op'er=20
moves out he will not receive any of his shares back. He will, in that cas=
e,=20
have to consider his input as a donation to the co-op. Given that co-op fe=
es=20
will be substantially lower than the average rent charged in Bloomington,=
=20
both parties end up gaining in such a scenario. But if another dweller sta=
ys=20
longer, and moves out after 5 or 6 years, than she gets the major portion o=
f=20
her equity back out of the co-op. That does not mean, of course, that she =
gets=20
all the money back she put into it, as much of it goes for emergency repair=
s,=20
maintenance, insurance, etc. But she will get a portion of the mortgage=20
payment back as her own equity. Still another dweller might be living ther=
e=20
when the mortgage is paid off, and will have the option of being a partial=
=20
owner of the dwelling. =20
=09A co-op is at root, then, an economic arrangement among people, and a=20
basic way to alleviate the lack of affordable housing. The arrangements=20
among individuals need not rise to any greater complexity. Indeed, any kin=
d=20
of building, from standard houses to apartment buildings to motels to trail=
er=20
courts to warehouses can be commandeered for co-operative purposes, so=20
long as the basic economic principles apply.
=09However, co-operative arrangements can be much more than=20
economic. They can be social, cultural, and political as well, and every g=
roup=20
of individuals will design their own particular mix of these concerns. Co-=
ops,=20
particularly ones wherein common spaces exist for mingling, performing=20
tasks or projects, sharing child care, cooking, and eating, provide excell=
ent=20
models for working social arrangements grounded in mutual aid and=20
support, solidarity, co-operation and sharing, self-respect and respect for=
=20
others. =20
=09The details of the processes outlined above are innumerable and can=20
not be adequately covered here, but any interested individuals or groups=20
should contact the addresses I have listed for more information. CATCH wil=
l=20
also be glad to provide copies of our brochure, by-laws, and platform=20
statement, meeting minutes samples, and other goodies, provided you send=20
us a few stamps to help cover postage. After all, we are a very poor=20
organization!

Some thoughts on the strategic relevance of the mutual housing umbrella: =
=20
countering standard anarchist dogma

=09What is the use of this approach for anarchists? To begin with, =20
Bloomie anarchists tend to define the most significant, real, and immediate=
=20
problems, to develop tools and strategies for attacking those problems, and=
 to=20
encourage and aid broad political participation in the forging of solutions=
. =20
Anarchists in Bloomington are not about spearheading groups like some=20
authoritarian vanguard, or ghettoizing ourselves in anarchist or subcultura=
l=20
enclaves: rather we integrate ourselves within the myriad grass roots=20
organizations and agencies around the city in order to learn from them and =
to=20
contribute our perspectives. =20
=09Housing is just one area wherein real and immediate problems can be=20
challenged: other areas include food production and distribution, plant=20
closings/de-industrialization and the re-organization of "work," child care=
,=20
and health care. It is our desire to situate ourselves within these strugg=
les=20
and to work for anti-authoritarian, non-statist solutions--which does NOT=
=20
mean, by the way, refusing Federal monies. If the defense, petrochemical, =
and=20
timber industries are not subtle about taking government monies, why=20
should we be? After all, it is OUR wealth produced by OUR toil and creativ=
e=20
energies. =20
=09However, the terms by which we accept this kind of money militate=20
against standard Liberal posturings on welfare. First of all, we do not in=
tend=20
to re-create the welfare net or become another overburdened social service=
=20
agency. Our organizations should be self-help in nature, and composed of=
=20
people who will directly benefit from participation and struggle. =20
Furthermore, we should devise strategies which will increase rather than=20
decrease our reliance on mutual aid and support, as well as maximize=20
political participation. Finally, we should use public monies only on proj=
ects=20
that will be self-sustaining, insofar as they will not depend on continual=
=20
infusion of government aid, but rather on the mobilization of the creative=
=20
energies of broad and previously de-politicized sectors of our community.
=09In a larger context, we see ourselves as part of a diverse and energetic=
=20
international movement of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) both=20
within core capitalist nations like the U.S., and throughout the Third Worl=
d. =20
CATCH, as an NGO, sees its mission in tandem with that of most NGOs=20
around the globe: to mobilize people into self-help organizations, to chan=
nel=20
energies and funds away from profiteers and elites into projects designed a=
t=20
the grass roots level, on a small and intimate scale, and to create account=
able=20
and face-to-face quasi-institutional bodies in order to solve the multiple =
and=20
complex problems created by capitalism and statism. In other words, housin=
g=20
solutions, like other solutions, should not be devised and directed by priv=
ate=20
profiteers or the state, but by non-profit NGOs and other groups that rely =
on=20
people power from start to finish.
=09On the other hand, one of the most glaring ethical problems we face in=
=20
our work to establish co-op housing is that we are still participating in t=
he=20
housing market, paying mortgages to banks, financing, the whole bit. Even=
=20
the term "affordable housing" itself is ideologically challenging because i=
t=20
assumes that homes are to be part of a system of commodity exchange, that=
=20
housing is not produced for use-value but for exchange-value, and must be=
=20
integrated into this network. Thus, all the while we refuse to profit from=
=20
housing, others are profiting: home owners profit from selling their=20
mortgages to us, the banks profit by the interest charged on our loans, and=
=20
politicians profit by using our success as a feather in their cap--as if to=
 say, see,=20
we helped CATCH accomplish their goals so WE are NOT to blame for the=20
housing crisis. If we allow this to happen, then people will think that th=
e=20
system DOES work, that it doesn't need to be scrapped. We do not want to=
=20
provide an inoculation for the liberal statist establishment.
=09Nevertheless, it is our belief that the strategies we have developed her=
e=20
are the most pragmatic and useful for addressing the particular housing=20
problems in Bloomington. We recognize that nothing short of a revolution=
=20
will eliminate the profit-basis of market exchanges for basic human needs. =
=20
But we are not content to wait for the onrush of utopia, and moreover feel=
=20
that revolution must be a lengthy process of self-education and organizatio=
n,=20
so that we can develop democratic, accountable, decentralized=20
organizations/councils/bodies which can not only achieve practical goals in=
=20
the interim, but train us in participatory politics for the future. What i=
s more,=20
organizing co-operatives can go beyond merely reducing people's costs of=20
living; they will, in fact, exist as parallel institutions, with an anti-p=
rofit, anti-
capitalist ethic built in at the base. Co-op housing will be a grass roots=
 self-
education process, a way in which we can learn how to organize and house=20
ourselves locally until such a time arrives where we can do this on a grand=
=20
scale. =20
=09The development of mutual housing associations such as CATCH, and=20
the establishment of co-ops allows for broad, daily, and direct political=
=20
participation in the process of housing ourselves. This in itself is a=20
radicalizing process for many, and a chance to see the contrast between=20
ineffectual municipal bureaucracy and concerted people power. Moreover, by=
=20
tying up houses within a co-op umbrella, we effectively take them out of th=
e=20
speculative market and prevent them from being subdivided into high-rent=20
student housing. In this way, we can act as a re-invigorated bulwark again=
st=20
the gentrification of neighborhoods by developers.=CA
=09None of this takes the place of other kinds of strategies designed to=20
raise consciousness among ourselves, as well as the costs for developers an=
d=20
profiteers. We NEED groups who are dedicated specifically to disseminating=
=20
literature and information on gentrification, and who are hell bent on taki=
ng=20
direct action against developers. We NEED and must support the efforts of=
=20
squatters, tenant's rights organizations, and housing advocates. And we mu=
st=20
support those who work directly to propagandize for anti-authoritarian=20
solutions or revolution. Nothing we do in our work need contradict what=20
others are doing: the anarchist community ought to recognize the=20
importance of integrated strategies and struggles, and the usefulness of=20
organization on multiple levels. To fail to do this will render us as drab=
,=20
simplistic, and undistinguished as the ossified old Left.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *=
 * * * * * * * * * *=20
* * * * * *

Addresses and contacts for further information

Citizens Acting Together for Co-operative Housing=09
PO Box 1277=09Bloomington, IN=0947402-1277

People's Housing
7510 N. Ashland=09Chicago, IL=09=0960626

National Association of Housing Co-operatives
1614 King Street=09Alexandria, VA=0922314

North American Students of Co-operation
PO Box 7715=09Ann Arbor, MI=0948107

=09