---
title: "States of emergency: cultures of revolt in Italy from 1968 to 1978 - Robert Lumley"
author: "Luxury Communism"
date: ""
category: "labour-and-unions"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/states-emergency-cultures-revolt-italy-1968-1978-robert-lumley"
source_name: "libcom.org"
cover: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/taynotfound/open-stacks-library/main/files/img/69464c9e0d82004e.jpg"
page_type: book
mirror_state: full
description: ""
tags:
  - "Robert Lumley"
  - "manufacturing and materials"
  - "strikes"
  - "car industry"
  - "unions"
  - "social movements"
  - "Italy"
  - "Italy 60s-70s"
images:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/taynotfound/open-stacks-library/main/files/img/69464c9e0d82004e.jpg"
links:
  - url: "https://shop.workingclasshistory.com/products/states-emergency-revolt-italy-1968-1978-robert-lumley "
    text: "please buy it here."
files:
  - name: "States of Emergency_ Cultures of Revolt  - Robert Lumley.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/taynotfound/open-stacks-library/main/files/States_of_Emergency__Cultures_of_Revolt__-_Robert_Lumley.epub"
    hosted: true
  - name: "States of Emergency_ Cultures of Revolt  - Robert Lumley.mobi"
    type: "MOBI"
    url: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/taynotfound/open-stacks-library/main/files/States_of_Emergency__Cultures_of_Revolt__-_Robert_Lumley.mobi"
    hosted: true
  - name: "Robert Lumley- States of emergency; Cultures of revolt in Italy from 1968 to 1978.pdf"
    type: "PDF"
    url: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/taynotfound/open-stacks-library/main/files/Robert_Lumley-_States_of_emergency__Cultures_of_revolt_in_Italy_from_1968_to_1978.pdf"
    hosted: true
---
# States of emergency: cultures of revolt in Italy from 1968 to 1978 - Robert Lumley

The complete text of the definitive book on the mass social movements in Italy in the 1960s and 70s in which author Robert Lumley traces their development, growth then recuperation and decline. Highly recommended.

If you enjoy this book, please buy it here.

OCRed for libcom.org by Linda Towlson.

The online text, epub, mobi and clean PDF versions are complete with the exception of footnotes and a few images. All footnotes and images are available, however in the scanned PDF version. epub & mobi versions produced by Luxury Communism .

## Acknowledgements and glossary

Acknowledgements The bulk of this book was first written as a Ph.D. thesis (finished in 1983 with the title ‘Social Movements in Italy, 1968-78) at the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, at the University of Birmingham. The research work was done in Milan in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Although that work has been revised and updated, my debts go back to my time in Birmingham and Milan. It was the support and good company of Charlotte Brunsdon, Myra Connell and Janice Winship which made it possible to sustain momentum when writing. I want also to thank Paul Ginsborg, who gave me invaluable help and advice when it was most needed, Liliana Grilli for her kind hospitality in Milan, and Antonietta Torchi for continuous encouragement and ideas. Whatever the value of the book for others, for me the experience of writing it has been important in introducing me to Italian people and their culture. For this I am deeply grateful to Italian friends, and to all those who helped me so generously with my research. Finally, I’d like to say how much I owe to Richard Johnson, who was a stimulating and caring supervisor, to members of the Magpie discussion group, especially Martin Chalmers and John Solomos, and to Malcolm Imrie of Verso, without whom this book would probably have remained a thesis. While I am responsible for what has been written (warts and all), I hope that those who have given me a hand will find something in it which will interest them.

The author and publishers would like to thank the following for their kind permission to reproduce illustrations: Alfredo Chiappori (‘In the commune . . .’, ‘Calm down . . .’, ‘Culture must be defended’); Altan/ Quipos (‘The cost of living . . .’, ‘Hello . . .’); Giorgio Forattini (‘I was white . . .’, Marx crucified); and Elfo (‘Identities, Secrets’). Every effort has been made to trace the copyright holders of illustrations: we must apologize to those we have been unable to contact.

Glossary of organizations Since the reader may not be familiar with the trade unions and political organizations in Italy, which are often referred to in the text using abbreviations (e.g. PCI, instead of Italian Communist Party), this glossary provides a brief guide. It is not comprehensive, but covers those organizations most frequently mentioned.

The Unions Italian unions are divided into three confederations: Confederazione Generale Italiana dei Lavoratori (CGIL) Confederazione Italiana dei Sindacati Liberi (CISL) Unione Italiana del Lavoro (UIL)

Each of these in turn is divided into ‘categories’ according to industry (hence FILTEA-CGIL is the textile workers’ ‘category’).

CGIL 	is the biggest trade union organization, with 2 and a half million members in	1968. Communist and Socialist parties (2/3rds and 1/3rd respectively) are	heavily, though not exclusively, represented at all levels.

CISL 	is the second union organization with about 1 and a half million members in	1968. It was formed as a result of a breakaway from the CGIL in 1948	and for many years it was dominated by the Christian Democrats, 	though its basis is not confessional.

UIL 	is the third union, with about half a million members in 1968. It includes 	Socialists (45%), Social Democrats (30%) and Republicans (25%) in its 	leadership.

In the engineering sector attempts to overcome this tripartite structure saw the establishment of the Federazione Lavoratori Metalmeccanici (FLM) in 1972, but the majority of members belong first to an affiliate ‘category’ and those who only hold cards of the FLM are a minority. The affiliate categories are: FIOM 	(Federazione lmpiegati Operai Metallurgici) is composed of engineering 	manual and white-collar workers and is part of the CGIL. In 1968 it had 	271,000 members. FIM 	(Federaziane Italiana della Metallurgia) is part of the CISL. In 1968 it 	had 170,000 members. UILM 	(Unione Italiana dei Lavoratori della Metallurgia) is part of the UIL. In 	1968 it had 103,000 members. ACLI 	(Associazioni Cristiane Lavoratori Italiani) was founded in 1944 to 	organize Catholic workers separately from the CGIL. Dominated by 	Vatican and Christian Democrat Party influences, the ACLI became 	 	more independent in the late 1960s. MO 	(Movimento Operaio) is the generic term meaning the official workers’ 	movement. Its British equivalent would be the ‘labour movement’

Workplace Representation Internal Commission (Commissione Interna) factory-based representative bodies elected by all workers irrespective of union membership. Their bargaining role was heavily circumscribed and by the late 1960s they were often out of touch with shopfloor opinion. Hence their replacement by Factory Councils post 1969. Delegates (Delegati) the nearest British equivalent is the shop steward, but they do not in the Italian case necessarily belong to a union. They are elected representatives who came into being during the Hot Autumn mobilizations, and were later made official. Factory Council (Consiglio di Fabbrica) the successor to the Internal Commission, it is composed of delegates and represents all workers in a workplace. Set up in the wake of the Hot Autumn, it was, however, much more firmly based on the shopfloor. CUB (Comitati Unitari di Base) rank-and-file workers’ organizations set up independently of the unions in 1968-9, mainly in large factories in the North. After 1969 they were increasingly dominated by political organizations. Zone Council (Consiglio di Zona) set up in the early seventies as part of the unions’ campaign for social reforms. They were composed largely of delegates from Factory Councils in an area. However, the Zone Councils remained on the drawing-boards, and never took root.

Employers’ Associations Confindustria (Confederazione dell’Industria Italiana) is the organization of private employers, although up until 1969 it also represented the state sector. lntersind is the body representing state sector employers.

Political Parties DC 	(Democrazia Cristiana) has been the party of government since 1948. Its 	membership is almost exclusively Catholic and its support comes from 	different classes, although its policies have favoured free enterprise 	capitalism. In May 1968 it won 39% of the vote, and 266 seats in the 	Chamber of Deputies. PCI 	(Partito Comunista Italiano) the largest working-class party with a 	membership of 1 and a half million in 1968, and 27% of the vote and 177 seats 	in the May 1968 election. It was in the government from 1945 to 1947, 	but otherwise represented the main opposition force. The party paper is 	L'Unita'. PSI 	(Partito Socialista Italiano) the first workers’ party in Italy, was greatly 	weakened by fascism. In 1947 a social democratic grouping broke away, 	rejoined the party in 1966 and then left again in 1969. In 1968 it got 	15% of the vote and 91 seats in combination with the PSDI. The PSI 	participated in government from 1963 to 1972. The party paper is 	L’Avanti. MSI 	(Movimento Sociale Italiano) a fascist party. It got 4% of the vote in 	1968, and 24 seats. PRI 	(Partito Repubblicano Italiano) a historic lay centre party which took 	part in the Centre-Left government from 1963. It got 2% of the vote in 	May 1968, and 9 seats. PLI 	(Partito Liberale Italiano) a historic lay right-wing party. It got 6% of the 	vote in May 1968, and 31 seats. PSDI 	(Partito Social Democratico Italiano) a breakway from the PSI. In the 	April 1963 election it got 6% of the vote, and 33 seats. PSIUP 	(Partito Socialista di Unita' Proletaria) was a left-wing split from the PSI 	following its entry into government in 1963. Its strength was in the 	CGIL. In May 1968 it got nearly 5% of the vote, and 23 seats. Il Manifesto was a left-wing split from the PCI of 1969 grouped around a journal of that name. It was important as an intellectual current rather than as an organized political force. It theorized a council communism of Gramscian inspiration. AO 	(Avanguardia Operaia) was set up in 1968-9. Although it had roots in 	Trotskyism, it called itself Marxist-Leninist. It was closely associated 	with the factory rank-and-file committees (CUBs) in Milan. From 	December 1968 it published a bi-monthly journal called Avanguardia 	Operaia. LC 	(Lotta Continua) was formally constituted in 1969 as a fusion of 	elements (ex-members of Potere Operaio, student movement activists), 	and identified itself with a variety of social movements, of which the Fiat 	rebellion of 1969 was the most formative. From November 1969 it 	published the weekly paper Lotta Continua. PO or 	Pot. Op. (Potere Operaia) founded in Tuscany in 1966-7 by activists 	associated with the reviews Quaderni Rossi and Classe Operaia. Important for its theroetical positions and for isolated but well-publicized interventions in factory conflicts in 1967-8. From September 1969 published 	a weekly paper called Potere Operaio. ML 	(Marxisti-Leninisti ) there were several groups which claimed to be faithful to the political line of the Communist Party of the People’s Republic 	of China, although only the PC d’I (Partito Comunista d’ItaIia - not to 	be confused with the PCI) was officially recognized. In October 1968 the 	Unione (Unione dei Communisti ltaliani Marxisti-Leninisti) was 	founded, with the paper Servire il Popolo, but fell apart in 1969. In that 	year Movimento Studentesco was set up in Milan. Based in the State 	University it took its name from the student movement but was a rigid 	ML sect. PRI 	(Partito Radicale) first set up in 1955, it was more a current of opinion 	than a party. Refounded in 1967 it campaigned chiefly on civil rights 	issues and against the fascist hang-overs in the institutions (laws, Church 	privileges). Its influence grew in the 1970s when it promoted referendum 	campaigns on abortion and other issues.

Today the political arena is covering over with a new flora; we should savour while we can the heady scents of these wild flowers and unruly weeds, so invigorating after so much deodorant and disinfectant. The functionaries and doctrinarians of the former social movements rub their eyes in bewilderment: these struggles are not in the place reserved for them; they do not speak the language they learnt in the last century 1 If the multiple points of social contact once characterizing the city can be reawakened under terms appropriate to affluence, then some channels for experiencing diversity and disorder will again be open to men. The great promise of city life is a new kind of confusion possible within its boundaries, an anarchy that will not destroy men, but make them richer and more mature 2

- 1 Alain Touraine, Zsuzsa Hegedus, Francois Dubet and Michel Wieviorka, Anti-Nuclear Protest: The Opposition to Nuclear Energy in France, Cambridge 1983, p.180.

- 2 Richard Sennett, The Uses of Disorder, London 1971, p. 92

## Introduction

> By this time one thing was clear in those mass meetings. The impression all the workers had was that this was a momentous point in the conflict between the bosses and us, a decisive moment , . . And in fact during the meetings frequent mention was made of the word revolution.

By this time one thing was clear in those mass meetings. The impression all the workers had was that this was a momentous point in the conflict between the bosses and us, a decisive moment , . . And in fact during the meetings frequent mention was made of the word revolution.

> We made holes in all the wire mesh grilles and then we made the torches; the torches were made with bits of sheets tied tightly together and then soaked in oil and for this too we agreed a time in the middle of the night we all lit the oil of the torches and we pushed these brands through the holes in the grilles but there was no one there to see this either the torches burned for a long time it must have been a beautiful sight from outside all those torches flickering against the black wall of the prison in the middle of that boundless plain but the only ones who could see the torchlight were those few people driving their cars that sped like tiny darts in the distance on that black ribbon of the motorway several kilometres from the prison or maybe an aeroplane flying above but they fly very high up there in the silent black sky and they see nothing.

We made holes in all the wire mesh grilles and then we made the torches; the torches were made with bits of sheets tied tightly together and then soaked in oil and for this too we agreed a time in the middle of the night we all lit the oil of the torches and we pushed these brands through the holes in the grilles but there was no one there to see this either the torches burned for a long time it must have been a beautiful sight from outside all those torches flickering against the black wall of the prison in the middle of that boundless plain but the only ones who could see the torchlight were those few people driving their cars that sped like tiny darts in the distance on that black ribbon of the motorway several kilometres from the prison or maybe an aeroplane flying above but they fly very high up there in the silent black sky and they see nothing.

The above quotations come from two novels by Nanni Balestrini: the first from Vogliamo tutto, published in 1971, and the second from Gli invisibili, which came out in 1987 1 They deal respectively with the beginning and the end of the period and the movements that are the subject of this study - a beginning that is bright and vibrant with hope and expectation as protest spreads and individuals find themselves through of collective action; an end that is filled with a sense of personal isolation, despair and darkness. Balestrini’s interpretation is, of course, highly individual, and he uses the licence of fiction. Nonetheless (and this is the reason for starting with his words), he reminds us of the point of view, thoughts and feelings of the participants of the movements, those who, in the Italian expression, lived the experience ‘on their skins’, often paying a heavy price for their illusions and their commitment.

However, it has perhaps become possible in the last few years to gain a more detached and analytic understanding of the post-’68 decade without losing a sense of what it meant at the time. There is now no longer the same obligation either to celebrate and justify in the name of a cause or to condemn ’68 and all its works as the postwar equivalent of the Fall. While this divide characterized much of the literature at the time of the tenth anniversary, in 1988 a number of studies appeared which were historical rather than polemical in approach. 2 . Indeed, a note of irony and self- consciousness has crept in, sometimes bordering on cynicism, and this marks a change in what Raymond Williams calls a ‘structure of feeling’. 3 Until 1980-81 (though it is difficult to pinpoint a date), there was a certain continuity in people’s conceptions of themselves with the ideas identified with ’68, especially among those who had been participants. Then, from the early 1980s onwards, that past came to resemble a foreign country. It is as if a frontier had been crossed and the language and points of reference had changed.

However, in the Italian case, the significance of the years 1968-9 as a watershed has been hard to forget. The student revolt, followed by the Hot Autumn of industrial disputes in 1969, shook the foundations of the Republic, leading to a decade of intense conflicts. These brought both positive and negative consequences. For a summary of the beneficial effects, it is worth quoting Umberto Eco: 'Even though all visible traces of 1968 are gone, it profoundly changed the way all of us, at least in Europe, behave and relate to one another. Relations between bosses and workers, students and teachers, even children and parents, have opened up. They’ll never be the same again.' 4 As for the regressive developments set in motion in the wake of 1968, the most obvious example is the rise of ‘black’ and ‘red’ terrorism and the formation of a clandestine Italy bent on the destruction of the country’s democratic institutions - what Giorgio Galli has called L’Italia sotterranea. 5 And although parliamentary democracy survived these threats, the adoption of draconian legislation and repression produced cruel distortions in the administration of justice, increasing the rights of the state at the expense of the citizen. 6

The events of 1968-9 can be said to have led to contradictory developments: on the one hand, to modernization, democratization and the growth of civil society; on the other, to endemic social conflict, continued institutional blockage and a polarization of politics into repression and terrorism. However, it is easy and misleading to construct a simple schema of cause and effect. The problem of analysing the continuities and breaks in the forms of oppositional politics, and assessing the extent to which they contributed to a more open or closed society is a key one for this book. Its focus, however, is on social movements.

Social movements, of course, entered centre stage in this period, not only in Italy but in many other countries. 7 The student and worker movements of the late sixties were joined by movements of women, youth, homosexuals, ethnic minorities and others. This phenomenon was important not just for the social groups in question, but for the political, social and cultural life of the societies involved. The meaning of democracy, for instance, was made a matter for debate by the advocates of ‘direct democracy’ in schools and workplaces, 8 whereas feminists began to redraw the boundaries of the ‘public’ and the ‘private’. Social movements can be seen, therefore, to offer an ideal vantage point for looking at the changes being brought about in a society, and for understanding the reactions to them. At the same time, the movements are themselves often laboratories of experimentation, incubating future ideas and forms of behaviour.

The Italian case is especially interesting from the point of view of social movements. In the post-’68 period in Italy they were more extensive then in many other countries, spreading into every area of society; they were also often more intensive, including extreme forms of action, and more I sustained, lasting for a longer period of time. Whereas, for instance, the May mobilizations in France were short-lived, in Italy the maggio strisciante was drawn out until the end of 1969, if not longer. 9 The movements, moreover, took particular forms because of the peculiarities of the national history and development, as witnessed by the role of southern immigrants in the strikes of 1969, or by the role of Catholicism. While the Italian case belongs firmly to the kinds of social movement which arose in Westem Europe, it had specific characteristics.

The key importance of social movements in recent Italian history can be appreciated in the rich and intelligent reflections and discussions to which they have given rise, These range from debates in the world of art and design, 10 through to those in works of fiction, political theory, sociology and semiology, a point that is illustrated by the career and writings of Umberto Eco.

Eco in the early 1960s was a member of an avant garde circle that promoted the subversion of literary orthodoxies and aesthetic canons; in 1968 he championed civil rights and was a participant and interlocutor in " the struggle to change universities, teaching practices, and how the idea of culture was understood; subsequently, as a columnist, he commented on the methods, objectives and messages of the social movements that traversed Italian society. His The Name of the Rose, published in 1980, can be read as a political allegory in which the debates about poverty, authority, inquiry and persecution set in a medieval monastery deal with issues raised by the conflicts of the seventies, especially terrorism. 11

However, the most developed considerations on social movements have come from Italian sociologists. Their empirical studies and theoretical work are remarkable by any standards, and hopefully, if it does nothing else, this book will show the value of their contribution. The most impressive single research project is the study of industrial conflict carried out under Alessandro Pizzorno at the State University of Milan and published in six volumes called Lotte operaie e sindacato, 1968-72. 12 Otherwise, the leading writers in the field include Alberto Melucci, whose work is slowly becoming available in English, and Francesco Alberoni, whose Movimenti e istituzioni represents a landmark 13 Pizzorno, whose approach helped create a school of sociology, developed analyses based on ' concepts of representation' drawn from Gramsci and Durkheim. Melucci, on the other hand, has switched attention away from the relationship of social actors to the political system or market, and towards exploration of the networks of meaning elaborated by and within social movements. In fact, it would be possible to reconstruct the close relationship between the evolution of the movements and the evolution of sociological theory, showing the interaction as a two-way process. Whereas in the early 1970s the sociologists’ interests broadly corresponded to the political orientations of the movements (in the sense of their relationship to the political system), by the end of the decade the concern with subjectivity and social and cultural identity expressed within the movements seemed to make the previous model redundant. 14

Yet while there is now a considerable literature in Italian on social movements, there has not been any attempt to provide a synthesis which looks at their development historically. The movements have also tended to be taken singly rather than as an ensemble. One of the objectives of this book is, therefore, to give an overview and to make some critical assessment of the literature in the light of its reconstruction and interpretation of .. the movements for the period 1968-78.

States of Emergency is more or less chronological in structure. Part I covers the period prior to the events of 1968 and aims to uncover the latent tensions which later erupted into open conflict. It provides an introduction to the peculiarity of the Italian crisis, relating it to the country’s historical development as the ‘first of the last, and the last of the first’, a country which only became predominantly urban and industrial in the late fifties and early sixties. Parts II and III deal respectively with the student and workers’ movements in the years 1968-9. This section forms the core of the book as these two movements, it is argued, established the coordinates for the direction political opposition would take in the following decade. It was not just a matter of what actually happened, but of the mythic status that the late-sixties revolt acquired. Part IV is, in fact, l more concerned with the appropriation of that legacy than with measuring the accuracy of reflections on the previous movements. It takes the examples of left-wing terrorism, the youth movement and the women’s movement as three case studies. The focus here is on the formative years of terrorism (rather than its point of maximum development), the so-called ‘movement of ’77’, which saw the emergence of a ‘youth politics’, and the campaigns over abortion, which marked a crucial stage in the development of a feminist politics in Italy. In the final chapter, some concluding observations are made about the relationship of the language of politics in the 1980s to that of the earlier movements.

This study, however, makes no claim to be comprehensive. It is, above all, a study of social movements in the northern Italian city of Milan, although observations are made about the Italian experience more broadly. This requires a word of explanation to help put the Milan movements in a national context.

Taking Milan as the vantage-point from which to survey Italian social movements as a whole inevitably involves difficulties. In fact, the Milanese experience cannot be said to typify or represent national developments. These varied from city to city (not to mention towns and villages). Milan is a city with its own particular social and economic structure, and ’ political and cultural traditions. However, its importance to Italian life, and its role as a centre for a great diversity of activities, meant that Milan was also a centre of social conflict.

Milan has been called the ‘real capital’ (il capitale morale) of Italy because it is a major commercial and industrial centre where many multi-national companies have their headquarters, in preference to Rome. Apart from being the home of La Scala, the opera house, and Il Corriere della Sera (the Italian equivalent of The Times), Milan has a complex cultural infrastructure. This includes publishing houses (these accounted for half the capital and a quarter of the employees in the sector in 1968); three leading universities; and numerous theatres, cinemas, and so on. Histor- ically, Milan had a crucial role in the formation of the nation·state, while its geographical position has helped make it a communications crossroads and the most cosmopolitan of Italian cities 15 In the early 1960s, Milan was the symbol of the ‘economic miracle’ and progressive modernism, But at the end of the decade it became a theatre of urban conflict.

Because Milan was a cultural, economic and political centre in the 1960s and 1970s, it was also a site of a wide range of social movements. The universities and engineering factories were in the eye of the storm in 1968-9, and in the following years urban conflicts over housing and other resources were an important feature in the city’s life. The various movements, notably the feminist movement, built up networks and counter-cultural activities so that an ‘alternative Milan’ came into being. 16 Thus, although the Milanese case cannot be taken as representative in a simple sense, the rationale for studying this city lies in the range of the movements which developed there, and the fact that it constituted a point of reference for opposition forces elsewhere in Italy. In 1968-9 only Turin could contest Milan’s primacy.

This study is provisional in many respects, and cannot claim to be definitive. While it aims to provide a historical perspective, it is unavoidably conditioned by the contemporary nature of the events and processes being described and analysed. The difficulties have already been alluded to in commenting on pendulum swings in how ’68 has been viewed from one anniversary to another. The proximity of the events also means that the sources on which this study is based are restricted. Use has been made mainly of contemporary published material - daily papers, magazines, journals, and emphemera such as leaflets, manifestos, and so on. Nor was it always easy to get access to documentation. Libraries and institutes are only just beginning to collect and organize archives for the period, and noserious attempt has been made to build up oral records 17 Therefore, private collections were used, along with tape-recorded interviews and field notes, particularly for PartsII and III; Part IV is more dependent on secondary sources. Future historians will have the advantage of archives, but material will not be available for some time to come (thirty years for the state archives; over fifty years for the Vatican archives). They will also have access to more personal documents: letters, diaries, photographs, and so on. Although much can be done in theinterim in terms of oral historical work, its validity depends on being able to test it with reference to other sources. 18

There is growing recognition within Italy of the need to gain a better understanding of this period of turbulent transition running from the late 1960s to the end of the 1970s. A number of conferences organized in 1988 and 1989, 19 and a spate of new publications are signs of this new · interest. 20 Moreover, it is a period which is receiving increasing attention from English-speaking scholars. 21 I hope, therefore, that this study will feed into this work. I hope also that it will make a contribution towards current debates about the changing nature of oppositional politics in contemporary Europe 22 and put the spotlight on the cultural as well as political dimensions of social movements.

- 1 Nanni Balestrini, Vogliamo tutto, Milan 1974, first edn, 1971, p. 106; Gli invisibili, Milan 1987, p. 280; in English translation by Liz Heron, The Unseen, London 1989.

- 2 Perhaps the most interesting book to come out in Italy is Peppino Ortoleva’s Saggio sui movimenti del 1968 in Europa e in America, Rome 1988

- 3 Raymond Williams, The Long Revolution, London 1971, first edn. 1961, pp. 64-88.

- 4 Scott Sullivan, ‘Master of the Signs`, Newsweek, 22 December 1986, p. 49.

- 5 Giorgio Galli, Italia sotteranea. Storia, politica e scandali, Bari 1983.

- 6 The novelist, Leonardo Sciascia, went as far as writing: ‘If in reply to those in Italy (and I include myself) who ask about Sakharov and the plight of Russian dissidents Chernenko was to suggest looking rather at what is happening to our administration of justice, it would be a correct and well-deserved answer, Nuovi Argomenti, October-December 1984.

- 7 The metaphor of the stage should perhaps be replaced by that of the television screen since this was the first time in history that protest across the world was beamed almost live from continent to continent; see Anthony Smith, The Shadow in the Cave, London - 1973, pp. 73-111.

- 8 For the best critical account of the theories of democracy under discussion, see Norberto Bobbio, The Future of Democracy, Cambridge 1987.

- 9 For a comparative study of social conflict in this period, see Colin Crouch and Alessandro Pizzorno, eds, Resurgence of Class Conflict in Western Europe, London 1977

- 10 For the debate on the politics of design, see Penny Sparke, Italian Design, London 1988, pp. 161-97

- 11 The relationship between Eco’s cultural analyses and the social movements is most evident in the anthologies of his articles; ll costume di casa, Milan 1973; Dalla periferia dell ’impero, Milan 1977; and Sette anni di desiderio, Milan 1983.

- 12 The findings of the research are contained in the last volume: Alessandro Pizzorno, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato: il ciclo di lotte 1968-72, Bologna 1977.

- 13 For the importance of the concept of `social movement’ to the development of sociology in Italy, see Paolo Ceri, ‘l quattro volti dell' anti-socioIogia’, Quaderni di Sociologia, 4-5, 1985, pp. 53-96; and Carlo Carboni, ed., Classi sociali e movimenti in Italia. 1970-85, Bari 1986.

- 14 14. See Alberto Melucci, ed., Altri codici, Bologna 1984.

- 15 E. Dalmasso, Milan: capital economique de l'Italie, Paris 1971.

- 16 A new development in the genre of the guidebook in the midseventies, the‘aIternative guide’ provided a map of this other city; for Milan, see Giuseppe Ricci, Claudio Marras and Mauro Radice, Milano alternativa, Milan 1975.

- 17 I mainly used the library of the Fondazione Feltrinelli. Hopefully, in the wake of the twentieth anniversary of 1968 more will be done to collect material.

- 18 For the foremost work in the fields of oral history in Italy, see the studies of Luisa Passerini: Storia orale, Turin 1978, and her semiautobiographical Autoritratto di gruppo, Florence 1988.

- 19 For example, the conference organized by the Department of History of the University of Turin in November 1988; 'Universita' e societa' italiana. Le culture e i luoghi' and conference organized by the Istituto Lombardo per la storia del Movimento di Liberazione in Brescia in March 1989.

- 20 The anniversary year, 1988, was marked by a deluge of anniversary editions in the Italian press, especially the weeklies, L'Espresso and Panorama, the best of which were found in the special numbers of the daily paper, Il Manifesto. Books include celebratory ones, like Mario Capanna’s Formidabili quegli anni, Milan 1988, and Nanni Balestrini and Primo Moroni’s L'orda d’oro, Milan 1988, but also Ortoleva’s Saggio sui movimenti del ’68.

- 21 The most notable recent work on the period is Sidney Tarrow’s Democracy and Disorder; Protest and Politics in Italy 1965-1975, Oxford 1989, which came out as this book was going to press. The publication in the very near future of Paul Ginsborg’s Italy since 1943, and Stephen Gundle’s study of the Communist Party and cultural change, will represent major contributions to our understanding.

- 22 A debate promoted by writings such as John Keane‘s Democracy and Civil Society, London 1988, and Boris Frankel’s The Post-Industrial Utopians, Cambridge 1987.

## Part 1: Origins of the crisis of 1968-9

In 1968-9 Italy experienced an ‘Organic crisis’, in which there was a massive withdrawal of support for the structures of representation, and an abrupt increase in political demands. The crisis of 1968-9 arose within specific institutional contexts, especially in the universities and schools, and in the factories, as will be shown in subsequent chapters; but to understand its dimensions it is necessary to look at its historical origins. This is not to say that the crisis was an inevitable outcome of Italian historical development; rather, the aim is to highlight some of the features, especially of the postwar period, which help explain the range of  probings and testing of the ‘social contract’.

This background to the main study of the social movements will be divided into three chapters. The first will look at the relationship of the subordinate classes of Italian society to the state, taking a cue from some of Gramsci’s writings on the question. The second will deal with the  organizations of civil society; it will focus in particular on relations between employers and workers, and between the working class and its representative bodies (the unions and left-wing parties). The third chapter will concentrate on the perceptions of an injustice and the formulation of  ‘standards of condemnation’ which anticipated and prepared the mass social awakening and mobilization at the end of the 1960s.

This outline of the period before the eruption of the social movements is necessarily selective and partial; it attempts to delineate developments leading up to the crisis, not to provide a historical account of the postwar period.

Themes are introduced in these chapters from a historical perspective which are taken up and developed in parts II and III. The crisis of reformism is discussed in detail in chapter 4, in terms of the educational policies of the Centre-Left government which provoked a storm of protest from students. Distrust of the State is explored in chapter 11 with particular relation to the conflicting conceptions of law and order thrown up by the student and workers’ movement. The ‘moral outrage’ expressed in the slogans of workers’ demonstrations is connected up in chapter 16 to historical grievances. The importance of the historical legacy will be seen in how the social actors perceived injustices and how the social movements drew on the past to make sense of and ennoble their struggles.

## Part 2: The student movement

The student movement in Italy, as in other Western European countries, became the archetypal movement of opposition of the late sixties. It came to represent and symbolize new forms of rebellion and discontent as it was not a residue of older historical antagonisms, and arose in a period of relative growth and prosperity. Education was widely heralded by governments and parties, especially of the social democratic Left, as the means of levelling social differences, broadening the basis of citizenship and guaranteeing future prosperity. However, it produced the bitter fruit of conflict. Youth - the generation destined to create the future utopia - turned into a social problem and the angry conscience of a divided society.

The impact of the student movement owed much to the fact that it was an aspect of an organic crisis. Students were the first social group to mobilize en masse when conflict in the workplaces and in society as a whole was at its lowest level since the mid fifties. Moreover, it was the first time that students emerged as a social subject in their own right. Previously they had acted in support of other groups in a subordinate capacity. They had taken up general political questions. Now, students were important numerically. They were part of a new social grouping - youth - that came into being with the extension of schooling. But the student movement’s novelty and its significance as a model of social action gave it a historical role out of all proportion to the students’ relatively marginal position in society. In this section, the student movement will be analysed in the period starting from its origins in the early 1960s to its eclipse by the workers’ movement in 1969. Chapter 4 deals with the educational reforms of the Centre-Left government, which created or aggravated many of the conditions that provoked the student revolt. Subsequent chapters deal with the movement in the universities, and the emergence of a specific ‘student politics’, with case studies of the movements at the Catholic and State Universities in Milan in 1968-9. In addition there is an examination of the movement in the Milanese schools. Lastly, there are chapters on the student movement’s impact on the education system, and on its more diffused effects on political and cultural life in Italy. Although student  politics grew up within the institutions, the development of the theme of ‘student-worker unity’ led logically to more general political orientations. The popularization of ideas about ‘cultural revolution’ meant that the activities of radical intellectuals working not only within fields like theatre but also in the professions were rethought, with important consequences for the spread of conflicts into every sphere of Italian society.

## Part 3: The workers' movement

After a period of relative quiescence in the workplace, the years 1968-9 were turbulent. The scale of industrial conflict during the Hot Autumn of 1969 made it the third largest strike movement recorded in history in terms of lost working time (after, that is, the May 1968 general strike in France, and the British 1926 general strike). However, Italian workers not only withdrew their labour on a massive scale, but challenged the organization of work and the system of authority within the factory. In some cases, workers rebelled against the factory system itself and its hold over their lives. Industrial workers created a movement which overturned many of the rules and assumptions governing everyday behaviour and the regulation of conflict.

The following chapters will attempt to explain why it was that in Italy industrial conflict took on such radical forms; why it was that workers defied managements and rejected negotiation; why questions of pay and conditions turned into sources of a more general attack on social injustices. Some of the answers, as has been seen, lie in the longer history of class conflict in Italy, which made the factory a site of political and social antagonism. However, the social movement itself drew on and interpreted those traditional antagonisms in new ways. It is necessary to see how the movement developed in its early stages to understand its most dramatic manifestations during the Hot Autumn. Although description and analysis will focus on the struggles of autumn 1969, the first chapters will deal with the mobilizations, starting in early 1968.

The movement 's development can be roughly divided into four phases, and the chapters are organized accordingly. In the first phase of mobilizations, which was given a fillip by the turn-out for the general strike over pensions in March 1968, workers took action and made demands along fairly normal lines. In the second phase, which covered the period from autumn 1968 to spring 1969, industrial conflict took an unprecedented turn when workers organized themselves independently of the unions resorted to forms of direct action. However, the conflicts tended to be localized until the Hot Autumn of 1969 when different struggles converged in action over national contracts. After the signing of the agreements, a fourth phase followed. It is more difficult to date, but can be characterized as the period of the movement’s institutionalization.

The chapters are organized chronologically to chart the phases of the movement's development. Thus, chapter 11 deals with the first signs of revolt in the workplaces, whilst chapter 17 outlines the processes of institutionalization. However, they also examine certain exemplary cases of industrial militancy such as the Pirelli company’s disputes in Milan (chapter 12), white collar agitation (chapter 13), and the Turin events (chapter 14). These respectively raise the issues of the development of grassroots organizations, the role of the so-called ‘new working class', and The ‘refusal' of the factory system. While the focus is on Milanese developments, these are put in a national context, and the workers' movement is assessed more generally in terms of its role in representing oppositional forces in society.

## Bibliography

All major sources cited in the text are listed here; sources referred to in the footnotes are not all included. 1 Because the majority of the leaflets of the student movement are not dated or signed, they are difficult to classify. These are to be found in the Feltrinelli Institute in Milan where they are kept under the general heading ‘Movimento Studentesco’ Private collections of leaflets, interviews and field notes are mentioned only in the footnotes.

For the interested reader, the following Italian periodicals were used in research. Daily Papers: L’Unita, Il Corriere della Sera (Milanese editions); Weekly and Monthly Papers and Magazines: L'Espresso, Lotta Continua, Potere Operaio, Rinascita; Joumals: Aut Aut, Avanguardia Operaia, Classe, Contro Informazione, Dibattito Sindacale, Erba Voglio, Fabbrica e Stato, Inchiesta, Il Manifesto, Il Mulino, Ombre Rosse, Primo Maggio, Problemi del Socialismo, Quaderni Piacentini, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, Quaderni Rossi, Re Nudo, Rosso, La Sinistra, Sinistra Proletaria.

Accornero, Aris, ‘Per una nuova fase di studi sul movimento sindacale’, in A. Accornero et al., Movimento sindacale e societa italiana, Milan 1977. -‘Fabbrica diffusa e nuova classe operaia’, Inchiesta, July/August 1978. -Il lavoro come ideologia, Bologna 1980. Adler Hellman, Judith, Journeys among Women, New York 1987. Aguzzi, Luciano, Scuola, studenti e lotta di classe, Milan 1976. -Un liceo, un luogo di lotta, Milan 1976. Alberoni, Francesco, ‘Societa, cultura e communicazioni di massa’, Annali della Scuola Superiore delle Communicazioni Sociali, Universita del Sacro Cuore, 2, Milan 1966. -Statu nascenti, Bologna 1966. -Classi e generazioni, Bologna 1970. -Italia in trasformazione, Bologna 1976. -Movimento e istituzione, Bologna 1977. - ‘Une opposition de gauche au PCI, est-elle possible pour lui?’, in Fabrizio Calvi, ed., Italie ‘77, Paris 1977. -‘Movimento e istituzione in Italia tra il 1960 e il 1970’, in L. Graziano, ed., La crisi italiana, Bologna 1979. Alemanni, Ferigo and Gheddo, Autoriduzione, Milan 1975. Allum, Percy, Italy -Republic Without Government?, London 1973. -Politics and Society in Post-war Naples, Cambridge 1973. -‘Uniformity Undone: Aspects of Catholic Culture in Post-war Italy’, in Z. Baranski and R. Lumley, eds, Culture and Conflict in Post-war Italy, London 1990. Alquati, Romano, ‘Comparizione del capitale e forza lavoro alla Olivetti’, Quaderni Rossi, 2, 1972. Amyot, Grant, Sulla Fiat, Milan 1975. -‘Per un’analisi; della composizione di classe degli studenti.’ Aut Aut, 154, 1976. ` -The Italian Communist Party, London 1981. Anderson, Perry, Considerations on Western Marxism, London 1976. ‘The Affinities of Noberto Bobbio’, New Left Review, 170, 1988 Angotti, Thomas, Housing in Italy, New York, 1977. Antoniazzi, Sandro, ‘Per lo sviluppo dei consigli’, Dibattito Sindacale, November- December 1970. Antonuzzo, Antonio, Boschi, miniera, catena di montaggiola formazione di un militante della nuova CISL, Rome 1976. Arbasino, Alberto, Un paese senza, Milan 1980. Amao, Giancarlo, Rapporto sulle droghe, Milan 1976. Arrigo, Giani, ed., Lo statuto dei lavoratori: un bilancio politico, Bari 1971. Asor Rosa, Alberto, Scrittori e popolo, Rome 1965. -Le due societa’, Turin 1977. Avanguardia Operaia, Per il rilancio di una politica di classe, Rome 1968. Baglioni, Guido and Treu, T., ‘Il controllo sindacale sul potere economico’, in Lo statuto dei lavoratori: un bilancio politico, Bari 1977. Baglivo, A. Papa, S. and Pellicciari, G., Le migrazioni oggi, Milan 1973. Balbo, Laura, ‘Le trasformazioni del sistema scolastico italiano’, in La scuola del capitale, Padua 1973. -Stato di famiglia, Milan 1976. Balestrini, Nanni, Vogliamo tutto, Milan 1974; first ed., 1971. -La violenza illustrata, Turin 1976. -‘Anche un processo agli intellettuali’, alfabeta, 49, 1983. -Gli invisibili, Milan 1987; The Unseen, trans. Liz Heron, London 1989. Ballestrero, Maria, Dalla tutela alla parita’: la legislazione italiana sul lavoro, Bologna 1979. Baranski, Zygmunt, ‘Pier Paolo Pasolini. Culture, Croce, Gramsci’, in Z. Baranski and R. Lumley, eds, Culture and Conflict in Postwar Italy, London 1990. Barbagli, Marzio, Disoccupazione intellettuale e sistema scolastica in Italia, 1859-1973, Bologna 1974. Barbagli, Marzio and Corbetta, P., ‘Partito e movimento: aspetti e rinnovamento del PCI’, Inchiesta, 31, 1978. Barile, G., ‘Classe operaia e mobilita sociale’, Classe, 12, 1976. Barrett, Michele, Women’s Oppression Today, London 1980. Basilico, Vito, ‘Pirelli: un decennio di lotte viste da un protagonista’, Classe, 12, 1976. Baudrillard, Jean, Simulations, New York 1983. Beccalli, Bianca, ‘Scioperi e organizzazione sindacale: Milano 1959-70’, Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia, XXI, 1971. -‘The Rebirth of Italian Trade Unionism: 1943-54’, in S. Woolf, ed., Rebirth 0f Modern Italy, London 1971. -‘Lotte alla Pirelli’, Quaderni Piacentini, 50, 1973. -‘Redaelli’, in A. Pizzomo, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato, vol. 5, Bologna 1975. -‘Protesta giovanile e opposizione politica’, Quaderni Piacentini, 64, 1977. -‘Classe operaia e nuovi movimenti collettivi’, in G. Germani, ed., Mutamento e classi sociali in Italia, Naples 1981. -Youth Movement and Public Policy in Milan: 1975-79, Centre for European Studies, Harvard University, mimeograph 1981. Beccalli, Bianca and Salvati, M., ‘Divisione del lavoro; capitalismo, socialismo, utopia’, Quaderni Piacentini, 40, 1970. Bechelloni, Giovanni, Cultura e ideologia nella nuova sinistra, Milan 1973. -La macchina culturale in Italia, Bologna 1974. -‘L’universita introvabile’, Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia, 1, 1977. Belotti, Elena Gianini, Little Girls, London 1975. Benetti, M. and Regini, M., ‘Considerazioni generali sui vincoli posti dalla forza lavoro occupata alla sua utilizzazione nell’azienda’ in P. Alessandrini, ed., Conflittualita e aspetti normativi del lavoro, Bologna 1978. Berardi, Franco, Le ciel est enfin tombe’ sur la terre, Paris 1978. Berger, John, Selected Essays and Articles, London 1971. Berger, John and Mohr, Jean, A Seventh Man, London 1975. Bianchi, G., Frigo, F., et al., Grande impresa e conflitto industriale, Rome 1970. -I CUB, Rome 1970. Bianchi, G., Dugo, A., and Martinelli, U., Assenteismo, orario di lavoro e scioperi nell’industria italiana, Milan 1972. Bianchi, G., and Ellena, A., Giovani tra classe e generazioni, Milan 1973. Bianchi, Marina, and Mormino, M., ‘Militanti di se stesse. Il movimento delle donne a Milano’, in A. Melucci, ed., Altri Codici, Milan 1984. Bianchi, Sandro ‘Lo sciopero a scacchiera’, Prima Communicazione, April-May 1974. Blackmer, D. ‘Post War Italian Communism’ in D. Blackmer and S. Tarrow, Communism in Italy and France, Princeton 1975. Boato, Marco, Il ‘68 e’ morto: Viva il ‘68, Verona 1979. Bobbio, Luigi, Lotta continua: storia di una organizzazione rivoluzionaria, Rome 1979. Bobbio, Norberto, ‘Democracy and Invisible Government’, Telos, 52, Summer 1982. -The future of Democracy, Cambridge 1987. Which Socialism?, Cambridge 1988. Bocca, Giorgio, Il terrorismo italiano, Milan 1978. -Il caso 7 aprile: Toni Negri e la grande inquisizione, Milan 1980. -Noi terroristi, Milan 1985. Boccarossa, Liliana, et al., ‘Donne, violenza e identita’’, in Luigi Manconi, ed., La Violenza e la Politica, Rome 1979. Boccia, V., ‘Il filo del discorso’, Memoria, 19-20, 1987. Bocchio, Flora, and Torchi, Antonia, L’acqua in gabbia -voci di donne dentro il sindacato, Milan 1978. Boffi, M., Cofini, S., Giasanti, A., and Mingione, E., Citta e conflitto sociale, Milan 1972. Bolchini, Piero, La Pirelli: operai e padroni, Florence 1967. Bologna, Sergio, ‘Il rapporto societa-fabbrica come categoria storica’, Primo Maggio, 2, October 1973. -Class composition and the theory of the party at the origin of the workers 'councils movement’, in CSE Pamphlet no. 1, The Labour Process and Class Strategies, London 1976. -‘The Tribe of Moles’ in Red Notes, Working Class Autonomy and the  Crisis, London 1979. Bonaccini, Aldo, ‘Il soffitto delle ACLI Milanesi’, Rinascita, 19 July 1968. Bonanate, L., ed., Dimensioni del terrorismo politica, Milan 1979. Boneschi, M., Donne e liquidazione: Unidal, Milan 1978. Bonvini, G., ed., Un minuto piu’ del padrone, Milan 1977. Bourdieu, Pierre, ‘The production of belief: contribution to an economy of symbolic goods’, Media, Culture and Society, 2, 1980. -Homo Academicus, Cambridge 1988. Bozzini, Federico, Il furto campestre - una forma di lotta di massa, Milan 1977. Bozzini, Federico, and Carbognin, M., Perche’ parlare di storia - contributo dell’area veronese, mimeograph, 1978. Branzi, Andrea, The Hot House. Italian New Wave Design, London 1984. Brecht, Bertolt, ‘Theorie de la radio (1927-32)’, in Ecrits sur la litterature et l’art, Paris 1970. Cacciari, Massimo, ‘Sinistreritas’, in Il concetto di sinistra, Milan 1982. Caesar, Michael, and Hainsworth, Peter, eds, Writers and Society in Contemporary Italy, Leamington Spa 1984. Caioli, L., et al., Bande. Un modo di dire, Milan 1986. Caldwell, Lesley, ‘Church, State and Family, the women’s movement in Italy’, in Annette Kuhn, ed., Feminism and Materialism, London 1978. -‘Abortion in Italy’, Feminist Review, 7, Spring 1981. Cantarow, Ellen, ‘Abortion and Feminism in Italy’, Radical America, November- December 1976. Capanna, Mario, Formidabili quegli anni, Milan 1988. Capecchi, Vittorio, and Livolsi, M., La stampa quotidiana in Italia, Milan 1971. Castles, Stephen, and Kosack, G., Immigrant Workers and Class Structure in W. Europe, Oxford 1973. Castronovo, Valerio, Giovanni Agnelli, Turin 1977. -Italia contemporanea, Turin 1976. Cavallini, Massimo, Il terrorismo in fabbrica: interviste, Rome 1978. Cavazza, F.L., and Graubard, S.R., Il caso italiano, Milan 1974. Cederna, Camilla, Una finestra sulla strage, Milan 1971. Cella, Gian Primo, Divisione del lavoro e iniziativa operaia, Bari 1972. -Un sindacato italiano negli anni sessanta. La FIM-CISL dall’associazione alla classe, Bari 1972. - 1973 ‘La composizione sociale e politica degli apparati sindacali metal-meccanici della Lombardia’, Prospettiva Sindacale, 1, April 1973. -‘Gli operai comuni all’Alfa Romeo’, Classe, 8, 1974. -‘Garantiti e non garantiti’, Prospettiva Sindacale, 4, December 1978. ‘ Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, Unpopular Education: Schooling and Social Democracy in England since 1945, London 1981. Centro, Giovanni Francovich, I comunisti in fabbrica, Milan 1967. Centro Operaio (Quaderni di), Consigli di zona, Rome 1974. Ceri, Paolo, ed., Casa, citta’, struttura sociale, Rome 1975. - ‘L’autonomia operaia tra organizzazione del lavoro e sistema politico’, Quaderni di Sociologia, 1, 1977. -‘I quattro volti dell’anti-sociologia’, Quaderni di Sociologia, 4-5, 1985. -‘Le basi sociali e morali dell’ecologia politica’, in P. Ceri, ed., Ecologia politica, Milan 1987. Chambers, Ian, and Curti, Lidia, ‘Silent Frontiers’, Screen Education, 41, Winter/ Spring 1982. -‘A Volatile Alliance: Culture, Popular Culture and the Italian Left’, Formations, 1984. Chelnov, Sandra, ‘Abortion and the autonomous women’s movement’, Socialist Revolution, January-February 1977. Cherki, Eddy, and Wieviorka, Michel, ‘Autoreduction Movements in Turin’, Semiotext( e), 3, 1980. Cohen, Stanley, Folk Devils and Moral Panics: the Creation of the Mods and Rockers, London 1972. Collectif A/Traverso, radio alice, radio libre, Paris 1977 (orig. title: Alice e il diavolo). Colletti, Lucio, ‘A Political and Philosophical Interview’, New Left Review, 86, July-August 1974. - ‘Le Ideologie’, in Dal ‘68 a oggi, Bari 1980. Comitato Unitario di Base Pirelli, Linea di massa: documenti della lotta di classe: giugno-dicembre 1968, Milan 1969. Commissione Carceri di Lotta Continua, Ci siamo presi la liberta di lottare: il movimento di massa dei detenuti da gennaio a settembre 1973, Rome 1973. Commissione Pirelli, ‘Relazione sulla revisione di strutture della Confindustria’, Mondo Economico, 8, 28 February 1970. pp. 42-53. , CGIL-CISL-UIL, Fabbrica e salute: arti della conferenza nazionale, Rome 1972. Cooperativo Centro Documentazione, Dieci anni di invecchiamento, Florence 1978. Coppola, Aniello, ‘Pirelli: una vittoria dell’inventivita’ operaia’, Rinascita, 20 December 1968. Corrente Proletaria dei Lavoratori Studenti, Le Lotte dei lavoratori studenti, Milan 1970. Cortese, Luisa, II movimento studentesco - storia e documenti: 1968-1973, Milan 1973. Corvisieri, Silverio, Il mio viaggio nella sinistra, Rome 1979. Crepet, Paolo, and Pirella, A., ‘The Transformation of Psychiatric Care in Italy’, International Journal of Mental Health, 14, 1985. Crossman, Richard, The God that Failed, London 1950. Crouch, Colin, and Pizzorno, A., eds, Resurgence of Class Conflict in Western Europe, London 1978. Dalla Chiesa, Nando, ‘Del sessantotto e del terrorismo: cultura e politica tra Continuita’ e rottura’, Il Mulino, 273, January-February 1981. Dalla Costa, Mariarosa, The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community, Bristol 1972. Dalmasso, E., Milan: capitale Economique de l’Italie, Paris 1971. Dambrosio, Francesco, and Buscalia, Mauro Alberto, ‘Ambiente di lavoro e condizione femminile’, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, 54-5, MayAugust 1975. D’Antonio, Mariano, Sviluppo e crisi del capitalismo italiano, 1951-1972, Bari 1973. Daolio, Andreina, Le lotte per la casa in Italia, Milan 1976. -‘Conflitti urbani e mutamento sociale’, Classe, 12, June 1976. Daolio, Andreina, and Tutino, Alessandro, Pianificazione e conflitto nelle grandi aree metropolitane: il caso Milano. Seminario internazionale I.U.A.V. Mimeo- graph, 1975. d’Arcais, Paolo Flores, Sinistrese: dizionario dei luoghi comuni della sinistra, Milan 1978. Datola, S., 1977 ‘L’industria metalmeccanica milanese: 1945-75 ‘, in G. Bonvini, ed., Un minuto piu’ del padrone, Milan 1977. Davis, John, Conflict and Control. Law and Order in Nineteenth Century Italy, London 1988. De Cecco, M., ‘Economic Policy: 19455 1’ in S. Woolf, ed., The Rebirth of Italy, London 1971. Della Rocca, Giuseppe, ‘Evoluzione delle strutture di categoria’, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, 49, July 1974. -‘L’offensiva politica degli imprenditori nelle fabbriche’, Annali della Fondazione Feltrinelli, 1974/5. - ‘Un’analisi sull’organizzazione del sindacato in Italia: il funzionario e l’operatore’, Studi Organizzativi, no. 2, June 1977. De Mauro, Tullio, ‘La Cultura’, in Antonio Gambino, et al., Dal ‘68 a oggi: come siamo e come eravamo, Bari 1980. D’Eramo, Luce, Nucleo Zero, Milan 1981. Di Ciaccia, Francesco, La condizione urbana, Milan 1974. Dini, V., and Manconi, L., Il discorso delle armi, Rome 1981. Dolci, Luigi, ‘Ercole Marelli’ in A. Pizzorno, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato in Italia, vol. 3, Bologna 1974. Donini, Antonio, ‘Gli extraparlamentari e il sindacato’, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, November 1971. Dorigotti, Giancarlo, ‘Il PCI e la scuola’, in L. Balbo and G. Chiaretti, La scuola del capitale, Padua 1973. Downing, John, The Media Machine, London 1980. Eco, Umberto, ‘L’abito non fa il monaco’, in Francesco Alberoni et al., Psicologia del vestire, Milan 1971. -‘Une nouvelle langue: l’italo-indien’, in F. Calvi, ed., Italie ‘77, Paris 1977. -‘La donna e’ nubile’, in A. Sartogo, ed., Le donne al muro, Rome 1978. -Sette anni di desiderio, Milan 1983. -‘Towards a Semiological Guerrilla Warfare’ in Faith in Fakes, London 1987, (first edn, 1967). Eco, Umberto, and Violi, P., ‘La controinformazione’ in P. Murialdi and N. Tranfaglia, eds, La stampa italiana del neocapitalismo, Bari 1976. Enzensberger, Hans Magnus, ‘Constituents of a Theory of the Media’, in Denis McQuail, ed., Sociology of Mass Communication, London 1972. Ergas, E., ‘Femminismo e crisi di sistema’, Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia, 4, 1980. Fachinelli, Elvio, ed., L’Erba Voglio - pratica non autoritaria nella scuola, Turin 1971. -‘Una proposta: non usare i termini “sinistra”e “destra”’, Lotta Continua, 27 October 1981. Fare’ Ida, and Spirito, Franca, Mara e le altre, Milan 1979. Farneti, Paolo, ‘Partiti e sistema di potere’, in V. Castronovo, ed., Italia Contemporanea, Turin 1976. -‘The Troubled Partnership: Trade Unions and Working-Class Parties in Italy: 1948-78’, Government and Opposition, 4, Autumn 1978. Fazio, Fulvia, ‘Femminismo e movimento ecologista’, in R. Biorcio and G. Lodi, eds, La sfida verde, Padua 1988. Federazione Italiana della Metallurgia (FIM), Incontro Impiegati proposte di discussioni, mimeograph, 1969. Federazione dei Lavoratori Metalmeccanici, La repressione nelle aziende, Milan 1973. FerraJoli, Luigi, and Zolo, D., Democrazia autoritaria e capitalismo maturo, Milan 78. Ferraresi, Franco, ‘The Radical Right in Post-war Italy’, West European Politics, 2, 1988. Ferretti, Gian Carlo, Il mercato delle lettere, Turin 1979. Fo, Dario, ‘Dario Fo a Vincennes’ in Cahiers du cinema, 250, May 1974. -Can’t Pay? Won’t Pay!, London 1978. Foa, Vittorio, ‘Introduzione’ in G. Levi Arian, ed., I Lavoratori Studenti, Turin 1968. -‘Note sui gruppi estremisti e le lotte sindacali’, Problemi del Socialismo, 41, 1969. -‘La frontiera politica del sindacato’, Problemi del Socialismo, 39, 1969. -Note sulla scala mobile, mimeograph 1975. - Sindacati e lotte operaie, 1943-73, Turin 1976. - ‘Il sindacato di fronte alla transizione’, Problemi del Socialismo, 5, 1977. -‘Sul sindacato’, Quaderni Piacentini, 69, 1978. Fofi, Goffredo, II cinema italiano: servi e padroni, Milan 1971. -‘Piccola editoria: errori manifesti e virtu’ latenti’, in Quaderni Il Lavoro dell’Informazione, 1, 1981. Fornasier, Giordano, and Moresco, Mariella, Lotte ‘spontanee’ per la casa a Milano dal 1945-75 e loro rapporto con le istituzioni e le forze sociali, unpublished thesis, Universita’ Cattolica, Facolta’ di scienze politiche, Milan. 1976. Fortini, Franco, ‘Questo e un altro’, L’Espresso, 20 March 1988. Frabotta, Bianca Maria, Femminismo e lotta di classe in Italia, Milan 1977. -La politica del femminismo, Rome 1978. Frankel, Boris, The Post-Industrial Utopians, Cambridge 1987. Frey, L., ‘Analisi economica della occupazione femminile in Italia’, in L. Frey, ed., Occupazione e sottoccupazione femminile in Italia, Milan 1976. Frogett, Lynn, and Torchi, A., ‘Feminism and the Italian Trade Unions’, Feminist Review, 8, Summer 1981. Galeotti, Anna Elisabetta, ‘L’0pposizione destra-sinistra: riflessioni analitiche, in F. Ferraresi, ed., La destra Radicale, Milan 1984. Galli, Giorgio, Storia del PCI, Milan 1977. -‘La politica italiana’, in Antonio Gambino et al, Dal ‘68 a oggi, Milan 1980. -Italia sotterranea. Storia, politica e scandali, Bari 1983. Garelli, Franco, ‘Gruppi giovanili ecclesiali’, Quaderni di Sociologia, 3-4, 1977. Gargani, A., ed., Crisi della ragione, Turin 1979. Germani, Gino, ed., ‘Aspetti teorici e radici storiche del concetto di marginalita’ con particolare riguardo all’America Latina', in Marginalita’ e classi sociali, Rome 1976. Gilroy, Paul, ‘Steppin’ out of Babylon - race, class and autonomy’, in Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, The Empire Strikes Back, London 1982. Ginsborg, Paul, ‘Gramsci and the Era of Bourgeois Revolution’ in J. Davis, ed., Gramsci and the Passive Revolution, London 1979. - ‘The Communist Party Strategy and the Agrarian Question in Southern Italy, 1943-48’, History Workshop Journal, 1984. -Storia d’Italia del dopoguerra a oggi, Turin 1989. -‘Family, Culture and Politics in Post-war Italy’, in Z. Baranski and R. Lumley, eds, Culture and Conflict in Post-war Italy, London 1990. Giori, Danilo, and Pepe, Gabriella Rossetti, ‘150 ore -per una cultura di classe’, Classe, 9, 1975. Gobbi, Romolo, Il ‘68 alla rovescia, Milan 1988. Goodrich, Carter, The Frontier of Control, London 1975. Gorz, Andre’, Farewell to the Working Class, London 1982. Gozzer, Giovanni, Rapporto sulla secondaria, Rome 1973. Gramaglia, Mariella, 1968: il venir dopo e l’andar oltre del movimento femminista’, Problemi del Socialismo, 4, 1976. Gramsci, Antonio, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, London 1971. Grasso, Laura, Compagno padrone, Florence 1974. Graziani, Augusto, L’economia italiana: 1945-70, Bologna 1972. -‘Aspetti strutturali dell’economia italiana nell’ultimo decennio’, in A. Graziani, ed., Crisi e Ristrutturazione nell’Economia Italiana, Turin 1975. Gribaudi, Gabriella, ‘Terremoti’, Ombre Rosse, 33, March 1981. Gribaudi, Maurizio, 1981 ‘Un gruppo di amici - strategie individuali e mutamento sociale’, in E. Beltrami, ed., Relazioni sociali e strategie individuali in ambiente urbano: Torino nel novecento, Turin 1981. -Mondo operaio e mito operaio, Turin 1986. Grimshaw, Mark, and Gardner, Carl, ‘ “Free Radio” in Italy’, Wedge, 1, Summer 1977. Grisoni, D., and Portelli, H., Le lotte operaie in Italia dal 1960 al 1976, Milan 1976. Gruppo di campagni del Consiglio di Fabbrica della Pirelli Bicocca, Le lotte alla Pirelli: 1968-72, Milan 1972. Gruppo di Studio IBM, IBM, Milan 1973. Guidi, Gianfranco, Bronzino, A., and Germanetto, L., Fiat, Struttura aziendale e organizzazione dello sfruttamento, Milan 1974. Gundle, Stephen, ‘L’americanizzazione del quotidiano. Televisione e consumo nell’Italia degli anni ‘50’,  2, 1986. Hall, Stuart, ‘Deviance, Politics and the Media’, in P. Rock and M. McIntosh, eds, Deviance and Social Control, London 1974. Hall, Smart, and Jefferson, Tony, Resistance through Rituals: Youth Subcultures in Post-War Britain, London 1977. Hall, Stuart, Critcher, Chas., Jefferson, Tony, Clarke, John, and Roberts, Brian, Policing the Crisis, London 1978. Harvey, Sylvia, May ‘68 and Film Culture, London 1978. Hellman, Steven, ‘The PCI’s Alliance Strategy and the Case of the Middle Classes’, in D. Blackmer and S. Tarrow, eds, Communism in Italy and France, Princeton 1975. Hirschman, Albert, Shifting Involvements, Princeton 1982. Hobsbawm, Eric, Primitive Rebels, Manchester 1959. - Bandits, London 1972. - Revolutionaries, New York 1973. -‘Man and Woman in Socialist Iconography’, History Workshop Journal, 6, Autumn 1978. Horowitz, Daniel, The Italian Labour Movement, Cambridge, Mass. 1963. Illuminati, Augusto, Lavoro e rivoluzione, Milan 1974. Intercategoriale Donne CGIL-CISL-UIL (Torino), La spina all’occhiello, Turin 1979. Jaggi, Max, Red Bologna, London 1977. Jervis, Giovanni, ‘Condizione operaia e nervosi’, in G. Jervis, Proletariato industriale e organizzazione del lavoro, Rome 1975. Johnson, Richard, The State and the Politics of Education: Block 1, Part 2 (Units 12) in Educational Studies: The State and the Politics of Education, Milton ` Keynes 1981. -‘Educational Politics: Old and New’ in James Donald and Annmarie M, Volpe, eds, Is there anyone here from Education? London 1982. Joll James, The Anarchists, London 1964. Keane, John, Democracy and Civil Society, London 1988. Lanzardo, Dario, ‘L’intervento socialista nella lotta operaia: l’inchiesta operaia di Marx’, Quaderni Rossi, 5, 1972 (reprint). -La rivolta di Piazza Statuto, Milan 1979.. Laroche, Pierre, ‘La classe ouvriere dans le roman italien’, Le Monde Diplo- matique, December 1974. Lasch, Christopher, The Culture of Narcissism, New York 1978. Lepschy, Anna Laura, and Lepschy, Giulio, The Italian Language Today, London 1979. Lepschy, Giulio, ‘Sexism and the Italian Language’, The Italianist, 7, 1987. Lerner, Gad., Operai: viaggio all ‘interno della Fiat. La vita, le case, le fabbriche di una classe operaia che non c’e’ piu, Milan 1988. Lerner, Gad., Manconi, Luigi, and Sinibaldi, Marino, Agenda Rossa, Rome 1978. Levi, Corrado, ‘Omosessuali fuori’, L’Erba Voglio, May-June 1973. Levi Arian, G., I lavoratori studenti, Torino 1968. -Libro bianco sulle associazioni e i giornali studenteschi a Milano, Milan 1966. -Libro bianco sulla facolta di architettura di Milano, Milan 1970. Lombardo Radice, M., ‘Giovani senza rivoluzione’, Ombre Rosse, 1976. Longo, Biagio, ‘Fuochi, fatui? La resistenza delle radio libere’, Quaderni Il Lavoro dell’Informazione, 1, 1981. Lonzi, Carla, Sputiamo su Hegel, La donna clitoridea e la donna vaginale, Milan 1970. Lotta Continua, Take over the City, 1971. -Per il movimento degli studenti medi, convegno di Pavia 1971. -Dear comrades - readers’ letters to ‘Lotta Continua’, London 1980. Lotta Femminista, L’Offensiva: materiali del movimento femminista: quaderni di Lotta Femminista, 1, Turin 1972. Low-Beer, John, Protest and Participation: The New Working Class in Italy, Cambridge 1978. Lucas, Uliano, Cinque anni a Milano, Turin 1973. Ludovici, Emilio Samek, ‘Il movimento insegnanti a Milano’, Inchiesta, 3, Summer 1971. Lumley, Robert, ‘Working Class Autonomy and the Crisis: Italian Marxist Texts of the Theory and Practice of a Class Movement, 1964-79’, Capital and Class, 12, 1980. -‘Socialism: Utopian and Utopian’, Head and Hand, 13, 1983. -‘Challenging Tradition: Social Movements, Cultural Change and the Ecology Question’, in Z. Baranski and R. Lumley, eds, Culture and Conflict in Post-war Italy, London 1990. Lumley, Robert, and Schlesinger, Philip, ‘The Press, the State and its Enemies: The Italian Case’, Sociological Review, 30, 1982. J Lyotard, Jean-Francois, The Postmodern Condition, Manchester 1986. Maccacaro, Giulio, Per una medicina da innovare. Scritti 1966-76, Milan 1976. Macciocchi, Maria Antonietta, Apres Marx, Avril, Paris 1978 (original title: Dopo Marx, Aprile). Mafai, M., L’apprendistato della politica. Le donne italiane nel dopoguerra, Rome 1979. Magri, Lucio, ‘Via italiana e strategia consigliare’, Il Manifesto, 2, 1974. Mallett, Serge, La nuova classe operaia, Turin 1967. - Le pouvoir ouvriere, Paris 1971. Mancini, Federico, Terroristi e riformisti, Bologna 1981. Mancini, S., Socialismo e democrazia diretta: introduzione a Panzieri, Bari 1977. Manconi, Luigi, La violenza e la politica, Rome 1979. - Nuovo, difficile: una proposta bibliografica sulla produzione culturale delle ultime generazioni, June 1979. -Vivere con il terrorismo, Milan 1980. - Il discorso delle armi, Rome 1981. Manconi , Luigi, and Sinibaldi, Marino, ‘Uno strano movimento di strani studenti’, Ombre Rosse, 20, March 1977. Manghi, Bruno, ‘La spontanita’’, Dibattito Sindacale, March-April 1968. Manghi, Bruno, and Montani, G., ‘Analisi di una lotta operaia: la Candy’, in Contributi per una sinistra sindacale, Padua 1972. -‘La FIM dal 1969-70 ad oggi’, una relazione all’esecutivo nazionale della FIM 30 October 1974, mimeograph. -Declinare crescendo, Bologna 1977. Mantelli, Brunello, and Revelli, Marco, Operai senza politica: Il caso Moro alla Fiat e il ‘qualunquismo operaio’, Rome 1979. Manzini, G., Una vita operaia, Turin 1976. Marcellino, Nella, ‘La partecipazione femminile e il movimento sindacale’, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, 54-5, May-August 1975. Marcenaro, Pietro, Riprendere tempo, Turin 1982. Marchetti, Aldo, ‘Impiegati, linea sindacale e riorganizzazione del lavoro negli uffici’, Classe, 13, February 1977. - ‘Un teatro troppo serio’:Appunti di analisi del corteo operaio e dello slogan politico di strada’, Classe, June 1982. Mariani, Isidoro, ‘Incomes and Employment policies in Italian Economic Planning’ in Hayward and Watson, eds, Planning Politics and Public Policy, Cambridge 1975. Martinotti, Guido, ‘La partecipazione politica dei giovani’, Quaderni di Socio- logia, XV, 1966. - ‘Il Movimento Studentesco’, Problemi del Socialismo, 31, June 1968. , -Gli studenti universitari, Milan 1969. - Preface, in Giancarlo Arnao, Rapporto sulle droghe, Milan 1976. Marx, Karl, The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte in Marx-Engels Selected Works, London 1970. Massari, Roberto, Marxismo e critica del terrorismo, Rome 1979. Mazzetti, Roberto, Genesi e sviluppo del terrorismo in Italia, Rome 1979. Melandri, Lea, ‘Via Tibaldi e MacMahon’, Erba Voglio, September 1971. -‘Antiautoritarismo e permissivita’’, Erba Voglio, 3-4, February 1972. -‘Ma esiste il quartiere?’, Erba Voglio, 6, June-July 1972. -‘Operai censurati’, Erba Voglio, 12, August-September 1973. Melotti, Umberto, ‘La vera natura della societa’ cinese e le contradizioni della nuova sinistra’, Terzo Mondo, December 1975. Melucci, Alberto, ‘Dieci ipotesi per l’analisi dei nuovi movimenti’, Quaderni Piacenti, 65-6, 1976. -‘Vers une systeme de relations professionelles en Italie’, Sociologie de Travail, 1, 1976. -Sistema politico, partiti e movimenti sociali, Milan 1979. ‘New Social Movements, Terrorism and the Political System’, Socialist Review, 56, 1981. -L’invenzione del presente, Milan 1982. Melucci, Alberto, ed., Movimenti di rivolta, Milan 1976. - Altri codici, Bologna 1984. Merenda, Loretta, ‘La donna nelle coppie della nuova sinistra’, Inchiesta, 27, May-June 1977. Merli, Stefano, L’altra storia. Bosio, Montaldi e le origine della nuova sinistra, Milan 1977. Miegge, Mario, ‘Sviluppo capitalistico e scuola lunga’ in L. Balbo, ed., Scuola del capitale, Padua 1973. Milani, don Lorenzo, Lettere di don Lorenzo Milani priore di Barbiana, Vicenza 1970. Moore, Jnr, Barrington, Injustice, London 1978. Morris, Meagan, ‘Eurocommunism vs Semiological Delinquency’, in M. Morris, ed., Language, Sexuality and Subversion, Darlington, Australia, 1978. Movimento di Lotta Femminile, ‘Programmatic manifesto of housewives in the neighbourhood’, Socialist Revolution, 9, July 1971. Movimento Studentesco, Documenti della rivolta universitaria, Bari 1968. Nappi, Antonella, and Regalia, Ida, La pratica politica delle donne, Milan 1978. Negri, Massimo, Scuola di massa in Europa, Florence 1975. Negri, Toni, Dall’operaio massa all’operaio sociale, Milan 1979. -Pipe-line, Turin 1983. Nozzoli, G., and Paoletti, P.M., La zanzara, Milan 1966. Ortoleva, Peppino, Saggio sui movimenti del 1968 in Europa e in America, Rome 1988. Paci, Massimo, L’evoluzione dell’occupazione in Lombardia e la mobilita’ delle forze di lavoro, Milan 1968. -Mercato di lavoro e classi sociali in Italia, Bologna 1973. -‘Vecchi e nuovi conflitti sociali’, Ombre Rosse, 31, February 1980. -‘Marginalita’ e classi sociali in Italia’, in G. Germani, ed., Mutamento e classi sociali in Italia, Naples 1981. -La struttura sociale Italiana, Bologna 1982. Panzieri, Raniero, La ripresa del Marxismo-Leninismo in Italia, Milan 1972. -Lotte operaie nello sviluppo capitalistico, Turin 1972. -Surplus Value and Planning, CSE Pamphlet, 1, The Labour Process and Class Structure, London 1976. Parlanti, L., ‘Piazza Statuto, 1962’, in Red Notes, Working Class Autonomy and the Crisis, London 1979. Parlato, Valentino, ‘Rapporto sulla Pirelli’, Il Manifesto, October-November 1969. Partridge, Hilary, ‘Italy’s Fiat in Turin in the 1950s’, in Theo Nichols, ed., Capital and Labour, London 1980. Pasculli, Ettore, Analisi politica delle lotte per la casa a Milano, Facolta di Archi- tettura, Politecnico di Milano, mimeographed, 1976-7. Pasetto, E., and Pupillo, G., ‘Il gruppo “Potere Operaio" nelle lotte di Porto Marghera’, Classe, 3, 1970. Pasquino, G., ‘Capital and Labour in Italy’, Government and Opposition, 3, Summer 1976. Pasquino, Gianfranco, and Pecchini, V., ‘Italy’ in J. Hayward and M. Watson, eds, Planning Politics and Public Policy, Cambridge 1975. Passerini, Luisa, Fascism and Popular Memory. The Cultural Experience of the Turin Working Class, Cambridge 1986. -Autorittrato di gruppo, Florence 1988. Pateman, Trevor, Language, Truth and Politics, Nottingham 1975. Perniola, Mario, 1983 La societa dei simulacri, Bologna 1983. Pertile, Lino, 1984 ‘Dario Fo’, in M. Caesar and P. Hainsworth, eds, Writers and Society in Contemporary Italy, Leamington Spa 1984. Pezzana, Angelo, ed., FUORI: la politica del corpo, Rome 1976. Pillon, Cesare, I comunisti e il sindacato, Milan 1972. Pinto, Diane, ‘La sociologie dans l’Italie de l’apres-guerre 1950-80’, Revue Francaise de Sociologie, XXI, 1980. . -, ed., Contemporary Italian Sociology, Cambridge 1981. Pipan, Tatiana, and Salerni, D., Il sindacato come soggetto di equilibrio, Milan 1975. Pivano, Fernanda, C’era una volta un beat, Milan 1988. Piven, Frances, and Cloward, R., Poor People’s Movements, New York 1977. Pizzorno, Alessandro, ‘Introduzione allo studio della partecipazione politica’, Quaderni di Sociologia, XV, 1966. -‘On Gramsci’s Method’, First Italo-Hungarian Conference of Sociology, 1967. - ‘Sull’azione politica dei sindacati’, Problemi del Socialismo, 49, 1970. - ‘I sindacati nel sistema politico italiano; aspetti storici’, Rivista Trimestrale del Diritto Pubblico, October 1971. - Political Sociology, London 1971. -‘Quadro politico delle lotte operaie in Italia’, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, 51, 1974. -‘I ceti medi nei meccanismi del consenso’, in F.L. Cavazza and S. Grabaud, eds, Il caso italiano, 1974. -‘Fra azione di classe e sistemi corporativi’, Annali della Fondazione Feltrinelli, 1974/5. - ‘Due logiche dell’azione di classe’, in A. Pizzorno, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato: il ciclo delle lotte 1968-72, Bologna 1978. -‘Terrorismo e quadro politico: tavola rotonda’, Mondo Operaio, 4, 1978. Pizzorno, Alessandro, and Crouch, C., ‘Scambio politico e identita’ collettiva nel conflitto di classe’, in A. Pizzorno and C. Crouch, eds, Conflitti in Europa, Milan 1977. Poggi, Gianfranco, ‘The Church in Italian Politics, 1945 -50’, in S. Woolf, ed., The Rebirth of Modern Italy, London 1971. Pomata, Gianna, ‘La scienza e coscienza: donne e potere nella societa’ borghese’, Quaderni Aut Aut, 1979. Pompei, Giuliana, ‘Salario per il lavoro domestico’, L’Offensiva: quaderni di Lotta Femminista, April 1972. Portelli, Alessandro, ‘Oral Testimony, the Law and the Making of History: The “April 7” Murder Trial’, History Workshop Journal, 20, 1985. Procacci, Giovanna, ‘Caratteri dello sviluppo economico in Italia dalla fine del secolo alla prima guerra mondiale’, Archivio Sardo, 4-5, 1975. Rame, Franca, Introduction to D. Fo, Can’t Pay? Won’t Pay! , London 1978. Ranciere, Jacques, ‘Le Proletaire et son double ou le philosophe inconnu .... ‘, Revoltes logiques, 13, 1981. Ravaioli, Carla, ‘La donna’ in Antonio Gambino, et al,, Dal ‘68 a oggi, Bari 1980. . Red Notes, Italy: 1977-78 - Living with an Earthquake, London 1978. -Working Class Autonomy and the Crisis -Italian Marxist Texts of the Theory and Practice of a Class Movement: 1964-79, London 1979. Regalia, Ida, ‘Sit Siemens’, in A. Pizzorno, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato in Italia, vol. 4, Bologna 1975. -‘Le assemblee’, Quaderni di Rassegna Sindacale, 56-7, September- December 1975. -‘Rappresentanza operaia e organizzazione sindacale’, in A. Pizzorno, E. Reyneri, M. Regini, and I. Regalia, eds, Lotte operaie e sindacato: il ciclo 1968- 1972 in Italia, vol.6, Bologna 1978. Regini, Marino, and Reyneri, Emilio, Lotte operaie e organizzazione del lavoro, Padua 1971. -‘Labour Unions, Industrial Action and Politics’, Western European Politics, 2, October 1979. -‘Stato e sindacati nel sistema economico’, Giornali di Diritto del Lavoro, 1, 1979. Revelli, Marco, ‘Defeat at the Fiat’, Capital and Class, 16, 1982. A Reyneri, Emilio, ‘Magneti Marelli’ in A. Pizzorno, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato in Italia, vol. 3, Bologna 1974. I -‘Innocenti’, in A. Pizzorno, ed., Lotte operaie e sindacato in Italia, vol. 1, Bologna 1974. -‘Comportamento di classe e nuovo ciclo di lotte’, Annali della Fondazione Feltrinelli, 1974/5. -‘La lotta per la produzione e l’organizzazione del lavoro nelle fabbriche cinesi’, in Martino Ancona, ed., Proletariato industriale e organizazzione del . lavoro, Rome 1975. -‘Il sindacato in Italia oggi’, Il Mulino, ]ulyAugust 1977. ; ‘“Maggio strisciante”: l’inizio della mobilitazione operaia’, in A. Pizzorno, E. Reyneri, M. Regini and I. Regalia, eds, Lotta operaie e sindacato, il ciclo 1968-1972 in Italia, vol. 6, Bologna 1978. Ricci, Giuseppe, Marras, Claudio, and Radice, Mauro, Milano Alternativa, Milan 1975. Romagnoli, Guido, Consiglio di fabbrica e democrazia sindacale, Milan 1976. Romagnoli, Umberto, and Mariucci, L., Lo sciopero della costituzione all’auto- disciplina, Bologna 1975. Romeo, Maria, ‘La disciplina dei licenziamenti: un’analisi comparata’, in P. Alessandrini, ed., Conflittualita’ e aspetti normativi di lavoro, Bologna 1978. Romiti, Cesare, Questi anni alla Fiat (interview with G.P. Pansa), Milan 1988. Ronchey, Vittoria, Figlioli miei, marxisti immaginari, Milan 1975. Rositi, Franco, et al., La politica dei gruppi, Milan 1970. Rossanda, Rossanna, L’anno degli studenti, Bari 1968. Rossi-Doria, Anna, ‘Conservazione e rottura nel movimento delle donne’, Ombre Rosse, 25, June 1978. Rostagno, Mauro, ‘Note sulle lotte studentesche’, in Universita’: l’ipotesi rivoluzionaria, Padua 1968. Rowbotham, Sheila, ‘Women’s Liberation and the New Politics’, in Michelene Wandor, ed., The Body Politic, London 1972. - Women, Resistance and Revolution, London 1972. Ruffolo, Giorgio, Riforme e controriforme, Bari 1975. Sacco, Giuseppe, ‘Citta’ e societa’ verso il nuovo medioevo’ in U. Eco, ed., Il nuovo medioevo, Milan 1973. Salvati, Michele, ‘Slittamento salariale e sindacato con riferimento all’industria metalmeccanica, 1954-69’, Rassegna Economica, 6, 1970. -‘The Impasse of Italian Capitalism’, New Left Review, 76, November- December 1972. ' -- Il sistema economico italiano: analisi di una crisi, Bologna 1975. Sandretti, Armando, Lotte all’Alfa Romeo, unpublished thesis, Universita’ degli Studi di Milano, Facolta’ di scienze politiche, 1973. Sarno, M., and Sinibaldi, M., Il movimento degli studenti medi in Italia (1975-6), Rome 1977. Sassoon, Donald, Contemporary Italy, London 1986. Scaramucci, Piero, Licia Pinelli: Una storia quasi soltanto mia, Milan 1982. Schianchi, F., La Universita’ Cattolica, Milan 1974. . Schioppa, Fiorella, Scuola e classi sociali in Italia, Bologna 1974. Sciascia, Leonardo, The Moro Affair, Manchester 1987. Sclavi, Gastone, ‘Le due CISL’, Il Manifesto, October-November 1969. Scuola di Barbiana, Lettere a una professoressa, Florence 1967. Sennett, Richard, The Uses of Disorder, London 1971. -The Fall of Public Man, New York 1977. Sennett, Richard, and Cobb,J., The Hidden Injuries of Class, Cambridge 1972. Siciliano, Enzo, Vita di Pasolini, Milan 1978. Sidotti, Francesco, ‘Emancipazione e politiche culturali negli anni ‘60: Marcuse in Italia’, Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia, 2, 1974. Signorelli, Amalia, ‘Cultura popolare e cultura di massa: note per un dibattito’, Ricerca Folklorica, 7, 1983. Silj, Alessandro, Mai piu senza fucile: alle origini del NAP e delle BR, Florence 1977. Silone, Ignazio, Emergency Exit, london 1968. Sivini, Giordano, Partiti e partecipazione in Italia, Milan 1969. A Smith, Anthony, The Shadow in the Cave, London 1973. Soccorso, Rosso, Brigate Rosse, Milan 1976. Sodi, R., ‘Pagliamo il “nostro” biglietto!’, Realismo, 15, March 1977. Sofri, Adriano, ‘Sur les conseils de deleghes’, Les Temps Modernes, June 1974. -‘Sessantotto. La corsa nei sacchi’, Micro-Mega, 1, 1988. Sorlini, Claudia et al., Centri sociali autogestiti e circoli giovanili, Milan 1977. Soskice, David, ‘Le relazioni industriali nelle societa’ occidentali’, in C. Crouch and A. Pizzorno, eds, Conflitti in Europa, Milan 1977. Spagnoletti, Rosalba, I movimenti femministi in Italia, Rome 1976. Sparke, Penny, Italian Design. 1870 to the Present, London 1988. Squi/libri, Sara un risotto che vi sepellira’, Milan 1977. Stella, Simonetta,’Crescere negli anni ‘50’, in Memoria, 2, 1981. -La strage di stato: controinchiesta, Rome 1970. Sylos Labini, Paolo, Saggio sulle classi sociali, Bari 1974. Tamburrano, Giuseppe, Storia e cronaca del centro sinistra, Milan 1971. Tarrow, Sidney, ‘Struggling to Reform: Social Movements and Policy Change During Cycles of Protest’, Western Societies Program Occasional Paper, no. 15, Centre for International Studies, Cornell University, 1983. Teodori, Massimo, Storia delle nuova sinistra in Europa 1956-76, Bologna 1976. Teodori, Massimo, Ignazi, P., and Panebianco, A., I nuovi radicali, Milan 1977. Thompson, E.P., ‘Time, Work-Discipline and Industrial Capitalism’, Past and Present, 38, 1967. -‘The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the 18th Century’, Past and Present, 50, 1971. Tiberi, Emilio, La contestazione murale, Bologna 1972. Tilly, Charles, ‘The Changing Place of Collective Violence’, in M. Richter, ed., Essays in Theory and History, Cambridge, Mass. 1970. Tomasi, L., La contestazione religiosa giovanile in Italia (1968-78), Milan 1981. Tomassini, Roberta, Ideologia, intellettuali, organizzazione: sul neo marxismo degli anni ‘60, Bari 1977. Touraine, Alain, Evolution du travail ouvrier aux usines Renault, Paris 1955. -La conscience ouvriere, Paris 1965. -Post Industrial Society, New York 1971. -The May Movement, New York 1971. - Lettres a’ une Etudiante, Paris 1974. -‘I nuovi conflitti sociali’ in A. Melucci, ed., Movimenti di Rivolta, Milan 1975. -The Self Production of Society, New York 1977. -The Voice and the Eye - An Analysis of Social Movements, Cambridge 1981. Tovaglieri, Alberto, ‘Sul proletariato come soggetto rivoluzionario’, Quaderni Aut Aut, 172, July-August 1979. Tozzi, Silvia, ‘Molecolare, creativa, materiale: la vicenda dei gruppi per la salute’, Memoria, 19-20, 1987. Trentin, Bruno, ‘Organizzazione del lavoro e strategia operaia’ in Istituto Gramsci, Scienza e organizzazione del lavoro, Rome 1973. -Da sfruttati a produttori, Bari 1977. Treu, Tiziano, Sindacato e rappresentanze aziendali, Bologna 1971. Tronti, Mario, Operai e capitale, Turin 1966. Turone, Sergio, Storia del sindacato in Italia, Bari 1976. Ulivieri, Simonetta, ‘La donna nella scuola dall’unita a oggi’, donnawomanfemme, 4, July-September 1977. Valcarenghi, Andrea, Underground a pugno chiuso, Rome 1974. - Non contate su di noi, Rome 1977. Valluari, C., I gruppi extraparlamentari di sinistra, Rome 1976. Vattimo, Gianni, ‘Myth and the Destiny of Secularisation’, Social Research, 2, 1985. Vattimo, Gianni, and Rovatti, P-A, eds, Il pensiero debole, Milan 1986. Vento, Nino, ‘I giovani proletari: l’ideologia, il tempo libero’, Ombre Rosse, 1976. Vento, Salvatore, ‘Milano’ in R. Rugafiori, F. Levi and S. Vento, eds, Il Triangolo Industriale, Milan 1974. Viale, Guido, S’avanza uno strano soldato, Turin 1973. -Il sessantotto, Milan 1978. Violi, Patrizia, I giornali dell’estrema sinistra, Milan 1977. -L’infinito singolare. Considerazioni sulla differenza sessuale nel linguaggio, Verona 1988. 9 Wagner-Pacifici, Robin, The Moro Morality Play. Terrorism as Social Drama, Chicago 1986. Webster, Colin, ‘Communes’, in S. Hall and T. Jefferson, eds, Resistance through Rituals, London 1976. Weitz, Peter, ‘The CGIL and PCI: from subordination to independent political force’, in Blackmer and Tarrow, eds, Communism in Italy and France, Princeton 1975. Williams, Gwyn, Proletarian Order, London 1975. Williams, Raymond, The Long Revolution, London 1971. - Keywords, London 1976. -‘Base and Superstructure in Marxist Cultural Theory’, in R. Williams, Problems in Materialism and Culture, London 1980. Willis, Paul, Learning to Labour, London 1977. Woolfson, Charles, ‘The Semiotics of Working Class Speech’, Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 9, 1976. Zamarin, Roberto, Gasparazzo, Milan 1980. Zandegiacomi, Ninetta, ‘Critica della societa, condizione operaia, potere. Il punto di vista operaia nei giornali dei Consigli di Fabbrica’, Classe, 9, 1974. Zanzotta, A., ‘La cultura del narcissismo’, Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia, 1, 1980. L.388

- 1 Please recall that apart from chapter 1 unfortunately footnotes were not available in this online version, but are in the hardcopy.

[Read original on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/states-emergency-cultures-revolt-italy-1968-1978-robert-lumley)
