---
title: "Hamas Anarchists West And Palestine Solidarity Analysis"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/hamas-anarchists-west-and-palestine-solidarity-analysis"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "In the West, it is practically impossible to speak publicly about Hamas in any way that isn&#039;t an outright and total condemnation. Behind such remarkable limitation of the spectrum of public debate lies the idea that Hamas represents an &quot;evil&quot; so deep that it lacks any complexity. In p"
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/hamas-anarchists-west-and-palestine-solidarity-analysis)

In the West, it is practically impossible to speak publicly about Hamas in any way that isn't an outright and total condemnation. Behind such remarkable limitation of the spectrum of public debate lies the idea that Hamas represents an "evil" so deep that it lacks any complexity. In parliaments, universities and newspapers, Hamas is never discussed, simply because -- it is assumed -- there is nothing to discuss. The idea that Hamas is simply a "terrorist" group that wants nothing but death and destruction has become public and common knowledge among the social and political elites, a fact so well-established that it doesn't even need to be argued for.

Western radical leftists have unfortunately not been immune from this logic of misrepresentation and thought censorship. Whether through internalization of state propaganda, anti-arab racism and islamophobia, or due to ideological dogmatism, before and after October 7th many leftists have dismissed Hamas with little-to-no argumentation. Hamas gets brushed off as "reactionary" and "anti-semitic", and is characterized as an obstacle in the way of Palestinian liberation. This dismissal is often accompanied by baseless statements repeated over and over again, such as the notion that Hamas has no real support among Palestinians, or that the group was created and funded by Israel to undermine the Palestinian struggle, or again that Hamas has no regard for Palestinian lives and Palestinian liberation, and all it wanted to achieve with its October 7th attack was to provoke Israel into killing as many Palestinian civilians as possible.

In some cases, leftists will even go further and completely mirror the most inane islamophobic tropes and talking points of state propaganda. One such example is represented by the article "Capitalism's Death World", published on "Internationalist Perspective" last October. The article begins by equating Hamas to Al-Qaeda, stating that "Both [...] are guided by an Islamist ideology, based on myths of a glorious past and an even better future in heaven" . It continues, stating that Hamas has "utter contempt for human life, including sometimes their own. They are a clear expression of the death culture that capitalism in this epoch produces." Again, these ready-made phrases are given as "established facts" that everyone accepts, and hence they do not need to be supported with arguments. The fact that they belong to the collective imagination of the worst islamophobic right, and that they are repeated almost word-by-word by the supporters of Israeli colonial violence should alarm us all.

This piece has two aims. The first aim is to present some elements to help leftists in the West better understand Hamas. At this point, a disclaimer is in order: I have no scholarly expertise on Hamas. My limited knowledge comes from the literature on the movement that I have been reading, publicly available primary sources (official statements and interviews) and conversations with Palestinian and Arab comrades. The elements I will present here are by no means an exhaustive account of the history, politics and philosophy of the movement. They are just meant to highlight some important aspects which are often ignored. The conclusion that I hope will come out from this part of the article is clear: Hamas is a movement of national liberation. Its stated aims are to fight the settler-colonial project that is Zionism and to achieve national self-determination for Palestinians. Hamas is a movement-party; it uses a variety of methods -- from mass mobilization, to participation in liberal democracy, to armed struggle -- to achieve its goals. Its political leadership has demonstrated to be both pragmatic and resolute. As every national liberation movement in history, Hamas is a complex phenomenon with no shortage of oppressive tendencies and contradictions.

The reader will notice that in the article I don't reference many important topics. For instance, this article says almost nothing about Hamas's role in reproducing patriarchal oppression in Palestine, or Hamas's relations with repressive and authoritarian regional actors, such as the Iranian regime. These are terribly important topics, but they are secondary for the purpose of this piece. I am not trying to give good and bad marks to Hamas, whatever that might mean. What I am trying to do is much more basic: to show that Hamas's way of functioning and operating, its tactics and strategies, are those that we would find in any other national liberation movement. Therefore leftists should understand it and address it as such. Hamas does not warrant the exceptionalism, the over-simplification and the misconstruction with which it is often approached.

This brings me to the second aim of this article, which is to sketch a response for the question: What does this mean for anarchists / libertarian communists in the West? Clearly, none of us are likely to ever need to answer the question of how to materially respond to Hamas in our own geographies. This is a question that our Palestinian comrades have to navigate [1]. However, a rigorous understanding of Hamas is extremely important for us, I argue, for the following reasons: 1. to move us forward in our work of solidarity with the Palestinian struggle; 2. to help us better understand national liberation struggles, particularly those fought against settler-colonial projects, and our role in (solidarity with) them; 3. To prepare ourselves, theoretically and practically, for a present-future in which national and religious lines will become even more central to the struggle between states and their populations.

Some quick notes and definitions before starting. In the text I frequently use the expression "political pragmatism/dynamism": what I mean by this is the ability of an organization to adapt to difficult circumnstances and focus on the best path to achieve its objectives. Throughout the text I use the terms "libertarian communist" and "anarchist" interchangeably: who I mean to address with these terms are essentially anarchist-communist revolutionaries that are favourable to organizations. In the context of Palestine, I also use the terms "national" and "(anti-)colonial" somewhat loosely, essentially equating "national liberation struggle" and "anti-colonial struggle", or "national oppression" and "colonial oppression". Given that the Palestinian national oppression is colonial in character, I don't see this equivalence as problematic for the purpose of this article. All emphases in the quotes were added by me.

2.1 On National liberation Struggles and settler-colonialism 2.2 Palestine solidarity and anarchist organizations: some practical points 2.3 Conclusion

"The Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) is a Palestinian national liberation movement that struggles for the liberation of the Palestinian occupied lands and for the recognition of Palestinian legitimate rights."

- From the document "This is what we struggle for" (late 1990s), Hamas's response to a request by a European diplomatic mission in Amman for an explanation of Hamas's objectives, values, and ideals. [2]

Whether we like it or not, we can't deny the fact that Hamas is a political and social movement. It has developed its own political philosophy, largely drawn from that of the Muslim Brotherhood, grounded in ideas of political and socio-economic emancipation of the disenfranchised masses and of moral and spiritual regeneration based on a particular reading of the Muslim holy texts.

Since the public announcement of its foundation in 1987, Hamas has used a wide spectrum of tactics to pursue its objectives. It has a mass popular base, which it mobilizes through strikes and mass demonstrations. This popular base has been been built through Hamas's decade-long dual power strategy, which included the establishment of a system of movement-linked institutions that serve the poor: schools, hospitals, clinics, community outreach programs, women’s centers, youth centers, homes for the elderly, centers for vocational training, Islamic committees in Gaza's refugee camps. Sara Roy, author of the book "Hamas and Civil Society in Gaza" , categorizes these institutions as either traditional/nonactivist or developmental/activist: "the former tended to focus on addressing the basic needs of individuals and families—where institutional initiatives were defined by need, not vision—while the latter emphasized civic empowerment through community participation and were inspired by a longer, more articulated view." [3] Hamas is also characterized by a nuanced understanding of the role of violence in the resistance against Israeli colonialism. Since its electoral turn in the early 2000s, Hamas has also engaged in elections as a tool of struggle. Both these aspects will be outlined in the following sections.

The movement is structured into 4 constituencies: West Bank, Gaza, the prisoners in the occupation's jails, and the refugee camps in the diaspora. Each constituency is represented by a Shoura -- a consultative body whose members' identities are kept secret -- and each Shoura elects a 15-member executive politburo. All 4 Shouras have to be consulted before the movement takes any major decision. The Shouras also elect a national Shoura Council, an organ with representatives from the 4 constituencies, which periodically elects a national Politburo.

In her book "Hamas: from resistance to government" [4], Paola Caridi reports that Hamas's famous organizational resilience to Israel's relentless campaigns of arrests and assassinations is due to a considerable extent to the contribution of one man: Musa Abu Marzouq. Born in Rafah refugee camp in 1951, Abu Marzouq was president of the national Politburo when, in 1990, he was charged with the task of rebuilding the movement's structure following a massive wave of arrests which had brought the newly-born Hamas to its knees during the First Intifada. Since then, Hamas's ability to withstand repression has been grounded in two features: First, a strong link between the leadership in Palestine and the leadership abroad -- originally based in Jordan, Kuwait and Syria but now largely located in Lebanon and Qatar following the deterioration of relationships between Hamas and the Syrian regime during the Arab Spring. The leadership abroad could therefore manage the movement in Palestine during periods of harsh domestic repression. Secondly, a strong focus on Hamas's grassroot support in Gaza -- the movement's stronghold since its inception -- which has guaranteed a continuous influx of militants and leaders.

A common myth about Hamas is that the movement is a "creation" of Israel, and that it has been maintained by the occupation to undermine the secular Palestinian resistance. This narrative has become popular in some left-wing groups, with some comparisons being drawn with the United States's support for the Mujahedden in Afghanistan, and the consequent "blowback" following the Taliban's challenge to US power. I see this narrative as an attempt by leftists to resolve a certain cognitive dissonance: "I support Palestinians, but not Hamas. Therefore, it must be the case that Hamas is not a genuine Palestinian liberation movement". As far as I can tell, the narrative of Hamas as a creation of Israel is fully rebuked in the scholarly literature on the movement. Every Palestinian I have ever talked to about this issue, including those that do not support Hamas, told me they found such narrative ludicrous.

Just as many misconceptions, this myth is based on a factual basis that has been badly misread. It is true that before the foundation of Hamas, Islamist organizations were tolerated, and often even favoured by the Israeli occupation, which granted them licenses and provided funds to open socioreligious charities and community centers. The Mujamma al-Islami, a charity founded in 1973 by the Palestinian branch of Muslim Brotherhood in Gaza and that is often described as the "precursor" of Hamas, was among these centers. Until the 1980s, Islamist organizations, including those linked to the Muslim Brotherhood, had no aspiration to get involved in the resistance against the occupation. Rather, they were entirely concerned with the socio-religious sphere: their objective was to offer a self-conscious interpretation of Islam as a way to heal the trauma of the Nakba and the occupation in Palestinian communities, to re-center Islamic values within families, the private sphere and society; to rebuild social cohesion and stability with institutions that could aid people in poverty, offer healthcare and childcare, and settle legal disputes. The Israeli occupation responded to this phenomenon with a policy of non-intervention: "the intention was to be responsive to Palestinian wishes, allowing them freedom to enjoy their nonpolitical institutions as far as these institutions remained consistent with Israeli rule and posed no threat to it" [2].

At the same time, several members of the Muslim Brotherhood who saw Palestine solely as a religious cause, a land that would be part of a future khalifate, were opposed to Islamic organizations participating in the resistance against the occupation, arguing that true liberation could only come with the religious and moral regeneration of Palestinians in the personal and societal spheres. Israeli authorities looked favourably upon such views. Seeing that the Islamists seemed exclusively concerned with social reform programs rather than fighting the occupation, Israel endorsed some of these organizations hoping that they would undermine the popular support for resistance forces such as Fatah and the PFLP.

However, since 1979 young members of Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine had been driving efforts to shift the organization towards the path of resistance. Following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982, the discussion became compelling. With the massacres of Sabra and Shatila, the expulsion of the PLO from Beirut, and the creation of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad -- an Islamist resistance group inspired by Khomeinism -- pressure mounted on the Muslim Brotherhood:

"Having outflanked the nationalist and leftist forces within Palestinian society, the Islamists now faced the criticism that while others had been making sacrifices resisting the occupation, they had restricted themselves to social and educational services. Their detractors went so far as to accuse them of brokering a deal with the occupation authorities." [2]

After extensive consultations, particularly with the Jordanian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood, in 1982 a group led by, among others, Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, Khaled Mishal, Musa Abu Marzouq and Abd Al Aziz Al-Rantisi started working on a secret organization that would become the 'operational' branch of the Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine, with the explicit goal of resisting the occupation. Hamas -- the Islamic Resistance Movement -- was created. The organization remained mostly secret -- even within the Muslim Brotherhood -- until its public announcement in 1987. In this period of underground activities, the movement started consistently participating in and organizing acts of civil resistance, including boycotts and clashes with Israeli soldiers, such as the June 1986 protest, called by the Islamic faction at Birzeit University, which resulted in 22 casualties, including two killed [2]. Hamas's involvement in the popular resistance and its efforts to set up a military wing provoked immediate repression from Israel. By 1984, many Hamas operatives had been arrested while trying to acquire weapons. The Israeli army had also managed to put behind bars Ahmed Yassin, suspecting him of being the mastermind behind the new resistance movement. Following the public announcement of the movement during the First Intifada, a huge wave of arrests hit Hamas. In 1989, after Ahmed Yassin had been arrested once again, Israeli jailers tortured his son in an adjecent cell for several days, eventually getting Yassin to confess to his role in founding Hamas [5].

Hamas has never been the "Taliban" of Israel. The US funded and armed the Mujahedden so that they would fight the Soviets as a US proxy. Israel, on the other hand, never supported Hamas to fight or otherwise undermine the Palestinian resistance. Rather, Israel tolerated and sometimes endorsed Islamic social institutions -- which preceded Hamas -- hoping that these indigenous religious organizations would push Palestinian society to abandon the path of resistance, which at that time was undertaken by secular organizations largely based outside Palestine. Once the Islamist "galaxy" in Palestine produced Hamas -- that is, a resistance movement fully dedicated to the fight against the occupation -- Israel striked it as hard as it could.

Indeed, throughout the years Hamas has become predominant in Palestinian politics, while secular and left-wing organizations such as Fatah and the PFLP have lost much of their influence. This is due to a range of factors, too complex to discuss here, which includes the fall of the Soviet Union, Fatah's collusion with the Oslo accords and the corrupted Palestinian Authority, and the rising influence of Iran in the region.

In the next section, I reference Hamas's political pragmatism and dynamism, in both objectives, strategies and tactics. I take this to be further evidence that Hamas is a political movement that adopts the framework of national liberation struggles.

Hamas is known for bitter internal discussions on all issues, including on the role of armed resistance, diplomatic efforts, reconciliation with other Palestinian factions, participation in elections, negotiations with Israel, and the targeting of civilians. These discussions have brought the movement to take different turns throughout the years, from the acceptance of a Two-state solution on the 1967 lines with the Right of Return of Palestinian refugees, to the escalation of armed resistance that forced Israel to evacuate its settlements in the Gaza strip, the several proposals for decade-long truces with Israel (always rejected by the Israeli side), the 2005 decision to stop suicide bombings, and the electoral turn in the early 2000s.

To make decisions, the movement adopts a version of "democratic centralism". Major determinations are made through a process of "collective decision" -- that is, through full consultation with the four constituencies. To obviate to the problem of irregular communication, a single constituency may make important determinations that concern the whole movement, but these must then be adopted by the four constituencies as a whole. Once a deliberation is made, "everyone is committed to abiding by it, irrespective of their own positions" [4].

Azzam Tamimi, author of "Hamas: a history from within" [2], reports in detail about some of Hamas' internal discussions. For instance, in December 1995, a Hamas delegation from Palestine met with a group of disapora Hamas leaders in Khartoum to discuss whether the movement should participate in the 1996 Palestinian elections and whether Hamas should abandon armed struggle. This discussion took place in the immediate aftermath of the Oslo accords signed by Israel and the Fatah-dominated PLO. As is well known, Hamas rejected the accords. The movement was facing an Israeli campaign of assassinations and arrests, while the newly established Palestinian Authority (PA), whose responsibility under the agreement was to disarm Palestinian armed factions and quell resistance against Israel, repressed those protesting against the continued Israeli colonization in the Occupied Terrirtories. Regarding the Khartoum meeting, Tamimi describes "heated discussions" that lasted for 4 days and 4 nights: "Some of the delegates from inside Palestine had been strong proponents of both a halt to military activity and participation in the election. They had become convinced that the peace process would bring a solution to their existing problems if given a chance, but that an end to all violence and cooperation with the Palestinian Authority were required [...]. The opponents of participation argued at the time that, according to the Oslo Accords, the Israelis retained the final say on what fell within the remit of the PLC (Palestinian Legislative Council, the PA's parliament)" .[2]

During the debate, several delegates who had advocated for participation in the elections and an end to armed struggle changed their position, and the participants agreed "not unanimously but with a comfortable majority" against the participation in the 1996 elections and that "the decision whether to intensify, moderate, or qualify the level of resistance should remain the prerogative of the movement, which would assess the situation and take appropriate action."

At the end of the vote, Tamimi concludes, "all accepted that the meeting had been conducted in a fully democratic manner."

Hamas's leadership has, throughout the years, shown a high level of political pragmatism and capacity to adapt to circumstances to achieve its goals. Its willingness to negotiate with Israel on a variety of issues speaks to this pragmatism. Although we are used to hearing news pundits claim that Hamas's "refusal to recognize Israel's right to exist" sabotages all attempts to reach a solution to the conflict, it is Israel who in fact has repeatedly refused to recognize Hamas as an interlocutor. Israel also engages in assassination campaigns that target Hamas's leaders with the clear purpose of sabotaging ceasefire proposals between Hamas and Israel, as well as wrecking national reconciliation agreements between Hamas and its secular rival Fatah.

For instance, Ahmed Al-Ja'bari, a commander of the Qassam brigades (Hamas's military wing), was killed on the November 14th, 2012: up until then, Al-Ja'bari was playing a crucial role in negotiations to agree on a 15 years truce with Israel and the lifting of the Israeli siege on Gaza. This was revealed by Gershon Baskin, an Israeli academic who worked as a backchannel between the Israelis and Hamas. After Al-Ja'bari's assassination, Baskin wrote an article in the New York Times titled "Israel's shortsighted assassination" , which stated: "Mr. Jabari wasn’t just interested in a long-term cease-fire; he was also the person responsible for enforcing previous cease-fire understandings brokered by the Egyptian[s]. Mr. Jabari enforced those cease-fires only after confirming that Israel was prepared to stop its attacks on Gaza. On the morning that he was killed, Mr. Jabari received a draft proposal for an extended cease-fire with Israel, including mechanisms that would verify intentions and ensure compliance. This draft was agreed upon by me and Hamas’s deputy foreign minister, Mr. Hamad, when we met last week in Egypt." [6]

This was only one of the multiple occasions in which Hamas has expressed its willingness to reach a hudna , a truce with Israel. Hudna is recognized in Islamic jurisprudence as a legitimate agreement for the cessation of hostilities for an agreed-upon period of time. As a religious-legal concept that finds its origins in the life of Prophet Muhammad himself, the respect of the terms of a hudna is considered a most serious religious duty for all muslims. For years, Hamas leaders have considered the full spectrum of possibilities sanctioned by the hudna: in its most limited form, a hudna could mean a commitment from both sides to spare non-combatants in military operations. In its most comprehensive form, it would put in place a complete end to hostilities for a period of decades.

Tamimi reports that in Hamas's vision, the concept of a long-term hudna could be at the very base of a permanent resolution to the conflict:

"Another scenario prevalent within the thinking of some Hamas intellectuals is that the world situation will change so much that Israel, as a Zionist entity, may not wish, or may not have the ability, to continue to exist. In principle, there is no reason why Muslims, Christians, and Jews could not live together in the region in future as they lived together before for many centuries. [...] The post-Israel scenario, which has become a subject for debate within Hamas, is one that envisages a Palestine, or a wider united Middle East, with a Jewish population but no political Zionism. This is a vision inspired by the South African model of reconciliation that ended apartheid but allowed all the country’s communities to continue to live together. In Hamas’s thinking, Zionism is usually equated with apartheid, and its removal is seen as the way forward if Muslims, Christians, and Jews are ever to coexist in peace in the region. It would be impossible for such a scenario to translate into reality without a long-term hudna , which for the lifetime of an entire generation would offer communities and peoples in the region the opportunity to restore normality to their lives." [2]

This perspective is representative of the view of leading Hamas officials. In 2006, Sheikh Mohammed Abu Teir, Hamas's number two candidate in the Palestinian elections, told a Lebanese journalist that Israel and a Palestinian state could live side by side "at least for a generation or two"[5]. Ten years earlier, Sheikh Ahmed Yassin had told the same journalist that Hamas was ready to negotiate a long-term hudna as an intermediate solution to the conflict.

Such long-term hudna would have to entail at the very least the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops and settlers from the 1967 territories and an establishment of a (temporary) Palestinian state within those borders. Hamas has long been ready to accept this interim solution because, contrary to the case of the Oslo accords, the issue of the recognition of Israel would not arise:

"Hamas cannot, as a matter of principle, accept that land seized by Israel from the Palestinians has become Israel's. Hamas has no authority to renounce the right of the Palestinians to return to the lands and the homes from which they were forced out in 1948 or at any later time. It can, however, say that under the present circumstances the best it can do is regain some of the land lost, and secure the release of prisoners, in exchange for a cessation of hostilities. [2]

Hamas has never stopped reiterating its commitment to the full liberation of Palestine, from the river Jordan to the Mediterranean sea. It has, however, maintained a certain level of ambiguity on the so-called "Two-state Solution", both in statements and actions. What lays behind this ambiguity seems to be a long-term vision for liberation that passes through an intermediate stage in which Palestinians, relying on the broad international support for a two-state solution, obtain a fully independent and contiguous state on the 1967 lines, while refusing to recognize the legitimacy of the Zionist occupation of the 1948 territories. Hamas's political strategists probably contemplate the fact that, given the current international context and the strong military asymmetry in the conflict, a partial liberation of Palestine might be the only realistic victory in the medium-term. But following the achievement of a state in the West Bank and Gaza, Palestinians could then continue the struggle for total liberation by relying on the advanced diplomatic and political tools available to states. After all, the establishment of a Palestinian state alongside Israel would undoubtedly never be able to resolve some of the most pressing issues created by Zionism, notably the Right of Return of refugees, economic exploitation, colonial violence against Palestinians within the 1948 territories, and the claim to vital natural resources such as water basins. In this second stage of the struggle, Palestinians could also trust on time to play against Zionism: demographic shifts within Israel, and a changing international arena in which Western imperialism is increasingly challenged, could in the long-term make the the end of the Zionist project inevitable, ideally with very little bloodshed.

Of course, this is likely only one of the paths forward that Hamas leaders are contemplating. But as shown in Section 1.5, this blueprint for the struggle has been somewhat inscribed in the movement's most important document, namely the new charter of 2017.

Let us go back to Hamas's attempts at reaching a long-term hudna. The first such attempts date back to the the early 1990s. In Feburary 1994, Musa Abu Marzuq, then the head of Hamas's Poltiburo, made reference to a hudna with Israel in an article published in the Jordanian weekly Al-Sabeel [2]. In April of the same year, Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, one of Hamas's founding members and spiritual guide of the movement, was visited in his prison cell by by Israeli intelligence officers, who hoped to get him to publicly denounce the suicide bombings that were being carried out by the Qassam brigades. The "martyrdom operations" had started in response to the Ibrahimi Mosque massacre of February 25th, 1994, which saw American-Israeli settler Baruch Goldstein opening fire on a crowd of Palestinians as they were praying in the Hebroni mosque, killing 29 and wounding 125. Suicide bombings had never been used by a Sunni group like Hamas before, although they had been employed in the 1980s by the Iranians during the war with Iraq and by Lebanese Shi'a groups against Western and Israeli troops. In Palestine, they became the deadliest, most shocking tool of retaliation and deterrance in the arsenal of the Qassam brigades, which carried them out usually in response to violence against civilians or targeted assassination of Hamas's leaders.

Sheikh Yassin did not condemn the martyrdom operations, but proposed to his Israeli visitors to start negotiations for a hudna [2]. In her book, Caridi reports that three years later, in September 1997, King Hussein of Jordan personally reported to Israeli high officials that Hamas was ready to offer a thirty-year truce. "But Israel was not interested in truces" [4], Caridi concludes. "There is no evidence to suggest that the Israelis have ever taken the offer of hudna seriously​​​​​" [2] echoes Tamimi.

Hamas has also declared shorter unilateral truces -- such as a 50-days hudna in July 2003 [4]. Israel's refusal to reciprocate these unilateral truces has undoubtedly led many in the movement to lose faith in their usefulness.

Hamas is often depicted as fundamentalist and dogmatic group motivated by nothing but hate and religious fanaticism. In reality, since its inception the group has been characterized by impressive political pragmatism to pursue Palestinian national rights. In her book, Caridi reports a 2007 interview with Mahmoud A-Zahhar, then Foreign minister of Hamas's government in Gaza. A-Zahhar recalls when, in March of 1988, while he was in an Israeli prison, he was forced to meet with Shimon Peres -- who was then Israel's Foreign minister. Peres asked A-Zahhar how to "solve" the Intifada, which had been raging for 4 months. A-Zahhar offered Peres a proposal consisting of three points:

"Declare that you Israelis are ready to pull out of the West Bank and Gaza; [secondly] place the Territory under the control of a neutral authority in order to minimize our suffering and end the occupation. Thirdly, the Palestinians would have to choose a representative by means of an election [...] to continue negotiations with the Israelis. We in Hamas, I told him, are not ready to negotiate independently, because what we are talking about concerns the national interest". [4]

A-Zahhar reports that Peres expressed immediate willingness to discuss the Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza, but added that discussions on East Jerusalem would have to wait. "And I told him that it would be very difficult to find anyone among the Palestinians who would accept this [arrangement] -- Jerusalem should be first" . In a poorly veiled jab at Fatah, A-Zahhar concludes: "I made a mistake at the time, because the Israelis did find someone who was not only ready to delay discussions about Jerusalem, but someone who was prepared to abandon it forever".

Hamas also navigates diplomacy with the pragmatism typical of anti-colonial movements -- which are as we know condemned to fight terribly anti-symmetric conflicts where even a small positive change in the international arena can be extremely significant. For instance, in June 2009, newly elected Obama held a speech in Cairo University in which he recognized that Hamas could have "a role to play in fulfilling Palestinian inspirations [...]". Following years of complete isolation from the West and staunch Bush-era islamophobic rhetoric, Hamas's leadership sensed the opportunity, and publicly welcomed the "change in the American tone and rhetoric towards the region and Islamic world" . The statement, delivered by senior leader Khaled Meshal two weeks after Obama's speech, also warned: "We evaluate any change in an objective manner. [...] The effect of rhetoric is temporary. We are looking for change in the policies on the ground" [4].

In the following months, Hamas attempted to open a direct channel of communication with the new US administration on multiple occasions, with very little response from the American side, proving once again that a change of president does not mean a change in policy.

Even in Hamas's social sector, ideological work is paired with much-needed pragmatism. In her book on Hamas and civil society [3], Sara Roy reports of her visit to an Islamic community center in Gaza, where the chair of the center's board, "a well-known Hamas official", asked her whether she had any contacts with USAID, openly showing an interest in applying for a grant from the US government's aid agency. Roy's book goes on to show that this was hardly an isolated case among Hamas-affiliated institutions in Gaza, which does not come as a surprise if one reads about how much of a priority a well-functioning social sector is for the movement.

Clearly, Hamas does not act as a fundamentalist militant group whose purpose is to "destroy Western civilization". It is in fact in direct competition with Salafi Palestinian organisations such as the Jaljalat and Jund Ansar Allah, and often clashed with them militarily.

Interestingly, Caridi's book reports that Hamas senior leaders have privately expressed concern over the the radicalisation of younger cadres with respect to Salafism, which they explain as a result of the occupation transforming the habits of society (in Gaza), and the repression of the Palestinian Authority (in the West Bank), as well as the fact that living underground meant that militants of the "middle" generation were "force[d] [...] into solitude and block[ed] [...] from building social relationships. They were left alone with a computer and what radical information passed in front of them, without any mediation." [4]

The "middle" generation refers to the militants born in the 1990s, who lived through the extreme Israeli violence of the second Intifada and the disillusionment of electoral politics, which came after Hamas won the majority of votes in the 2006 national elections. The movement's desire for recognition -- as a legitimate representative of Palestinians, as part of the PLO and by the international community -- was shattered immediately, with a coup attempt and a US-Israeli-led campaign of isolation and economic blockade on the 1967 territories. In the context of the "global war on terror", the US and Israel made it clear that no matter what Hamas did, it could never be an interlocutor. This meant extreme disillusionment for the "middle generation" cadres, many of whom turned to armed struggle as the only way to achieve liberation. "Boys prefer to go into the Qassam Brigades rather than engaging in politics" , confided a young Hamas MP to Caridi in 2010 [4].

1. Our homeland has been usurped in its entirety, but we cannot concede one inch of it

2. There is an obvious imbalance of power in favour of the Zionist enemy.

3. We do not possess the armaments our enemy posses, but we have a faith that generates a will that does not recognize defeat or retreat before our goals are accomplished. This is a faith that demands sacrifice for the sake of religion and homeland.

4. The Arab and Islamic Umma is weak, feeble, and divided, and is therefore unable to support the people of Palestine. The international community is hostile to the hopes and aspirations of the Palestinian people and supports Zionist terrorism.

- to maintain the unity of the Palestinian people and safeguard the Palestinians from internal strife, which hinder resistance to the occupation"

- Abd al-Aziz al-Rantisi, Hamas's political leader in Gaza, 10 days before he was assassinated by an Israeli air attack in April 2004

As an anti-colonial movement, Hamas picks political tools, from mass non-violent mobilisations, to diplomatic pressure, to military operations, based on an understanding of the material conditions, and following bitter internal debate and adoption of a party line. When in 2018 Palestinians from Gaza engaged in mass non-violent protests known as "The March of Return", Hamas endorsed (and, according to some, attempted to co-opt) the grassroot movement. Hamas tried to use this moment to boost its image as a movement of non-violent resistance. During the protests, Ismail Haniyeh, then leader of Hamas in Gaza, held a rally speech under the images of Ghandi, Marthin Luther King and Mandela, advocating for "a hybrid strategy that combines nonviolent and legal resistance of demonstrators with an armed resistance that remains separate" [4].

Hamas's history is marked by important episodes of peaceful/non-armed resistance. In 1993, for instance, the Israeli government took 415 Palestinians it was holding in its jails and "released" them at gunpoint in the strip of no-man's land between Israel and Lebanon, attempting to force them into exile. The group of prisoners consisted mostly but not exclusively of Hamas's political leadership. The exilees, many of whom were doctors and engineers, immediately started organising: they refused to enter Lebanese territory, instead setting up camp on no-man's land and making sure basic needs were provided. They assigned administrative roles based on individual competence and organised a press center, with spokespeople liaising with the international press. The movement appealed to international institutions and relief agencies, and after one year of mobilisations and intense diplomatic pressure, Israel was forced to reverse its decision and start the repatriation of the deportees.

Hamas's pragmatism is paired with rigidity on red lines, such as the legitimacy of armed struggle, the refusal to recognize Israel's legitimacy, and the Right of Return of Palestinian refugees -- a crucial question for all Palestinians, and a particularly central one for a movement whose six out of the seven founding members were refugees of the Nakba. This combination of pragmatism and rigidity of principles has resulted in some interesting contradictions. Hamas refuses to publicly criticize or condemn armed resistance operations even if the leadership does not approve of them or if they are considered counterproductive. For example, in June 2014, 3 Israeli teenagers from illegal settlements in the Hebron area were kidnapped, allegedly by members of the Qawasameh, an influential clan within Hamas in Hebron which is known for trying to undermine attempts to reach truce agreements with Israel. Hamas's senior leader Khaled Meshal "congratulated" the "operation", but the kidnapping, which happened without knowledge and approval of the leadership, was disastrous for Hamas. The killing of the three Israeli captives offered the Israeli government the perfect excuse to start the most brutal assault on Gaza until that point, with the clear goal of wrecking one of the most promising attempt of national reconciliation between Hamas and Fatah. More than 2,000 Palestinians were murdered in the Israeli attack.

In other occasions, it is the political and the military wings that disagree on the appropriateness of armed resistance. The Qassam brigades, Hamas's military wing, has always acted with a high level of autonomy and has become more and more influential throughout the years, as Israel continues to shatter every prospect of peaceful resistance making a dent in its colonial project, and refuses to recognize even the possibility of sitting with Hamas at the negotiating table. An interesting episode of disagreement between Hamas's political and military wing is represented by the kidnapping of Gilad Shalit, an Israeli soldier taken prisoner by the Qassam brigades in 2006. The political wing of the movement disapproved of the operation (but never publicly), as the kidnapping of Shalit and the killing of two Israeli soldiers jeopardised Hamas's attempts to form a national unity government with Fatah. The response of Marwan Isa, a commander of the Qassam brigades, in an interview to Al-Jazeera: "it was clear that the enemy (Israel) , in those political circumnstances (the Hamas-Fatah negotiations) , was putting pressure on the ground, and closing in on resistance fighters. Therefore, we took the decision to counterattack and conduct the operation, regardless of the price to pay" [4].

Eventually, In 2011, Hamas obtained the release of 1027 Palestinian prisoners -- among them, militants affiliated to all factions of the resistance -- in exchange for the liberation of Shalit.

"No, we do not fight the Jews because they are Jews. We fight them because they stole our land and displaced our people; they carried out an aggression. We resist this Zionist project which is hostile. [...] if a Muslim were to attack me and steal my land, I have every right to fight back. This applies to all others irrespective of their race, identity or religion. This is our philosophy.”

- Khaled Meshal, president of Hamas's Politburo until 2017 [2]

"I want to proclaim loudly to the world that we are not fighting Jews because they are Jews! We are fighting them because they assaulted us, they killed us, they took our land and our homes; they attacked our children and our women; they scattered us. All we want is our rights. We don't want more."

—Sheikh Ahmad Yassin, founding member of Hamas, assassinated by an Israeli air attack in 2004, together with two bodyguards and 9 bystanders [2]

Since its foundation, Hamas has called itself an Islamic movement of national liberation, whose goal is "to liberate Palestine and confront the Zionist project" [7]. Hamas does not call for a religious war against Israel, "the West", "the infidels" or any religious or ethnic group. In fact, unlike other Palestinian armed resistance movements, Hamas has never conducted military operations outside of Historical Palestine.

Hamas claims to be defending the national rights of all Palestinians, including the rights of Christian Palestinians, and has repeatedly called for national unity of Palestinians of all faiths. In national and regional elections, Hamas has run candidates of Christian faith, and it has explicitly condemned Israeli invasions and dessacration of holy Christian grounds, such as the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, and the current destruction of Christian heritage in Gaza. When Hamas negotiates with Israel, for instance for the release of prisoners, I know of no episodes suggesting that it conducts such negotiations to favour Palestinians of Muslim faith over any other. Of course, I have no expertise to claim that Hamas does not at all discriminate against non-Muslims, but Hamas's explicit and public acceptance of the principles of religious tolerance present in the Qura'an, and even more importantly its actions on behalf of Palestinians of all faiths and the fact that it does not target Jewish people outside of Israel, cannot be honestly compared to the actions and rhetoric of groups like Al-Qaeda or ISIS.

Hamas's Charter from 1988 [8] does contain passages that define the cause of Palestinian liberation as a cause for every Muslim, and that define Palestine as an Islamic Waqf, “an Islamic land entrusted to the Muslim generations until the Judgment Day.” Thus, “no one may renounce all, or even part of it.” The Charter is also infamous for its call to "fight the Jews" and for its reference to the Protocols of the Elders of Zion. Tamimi's book gives a detailed and contextualized theological-philosophical and political critique of the Charter and its anti-semitic language. I will only point out some important facts: the text of Hamas’s 1988 Charter was most likely penned by a single man, Abdel Fattah al-Dukhan, one of the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood’s older generation in Gaza, without broad consultation from the movement, in a period of extremely brutal Israeli violence against civilians and combatants alike, which had almost stopped the newly formed resistance group from operating. Since then, throughout the years several Hamas leaders have made it clear that the 1988 Charter is a document situated in a specific moment in time and that it does not guide the actions of the movement.

Hamas's 2017 new charter [7], which is the result of 4 years of consultations and broad consensus within the organisation, is the document that most clearly positions Hamas as a national liberation movement: As opposed to the lithurgical tone used in the 1988 charter, there are fewer references to Islam, mostly highlighting its importance for determining Hamas's methods and principles, and underlining the role of religion in Palestinian history and culture. The 2017 documents explicitly adopts the language of national liberation movements, using words such as "colonial" and "colonialism" (4 times), "occupation" (10 times), "settlements" (5) "rights" (19), "racist" (2), "national" (14), "self-determination" (3) [4].

Article 16 and 17 deal with the issue of anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism by affirming that "anti-Semitism and the persecution of the Jews are phenomena fundamentally linked to European history and not to the history of the Arabs and the Muslims or to their heritage" . Hamas, the articles state, is at conflict with "with the Zionist project" , which is seen as "the most dangerous form of settlement occupation which has already disappeared from much of the world and must disappear from Palestine. [...] It is the Zionists who constantly identify Judaism and the Jews with their own colonial project and illegal entity." The document continues: "[Hamas] does not wage a struggle against the Jews because they are Jewish" and "rejects the persecution of any human being or the undermining of his or her rights on nationalist, religious or sectarian grounds."

While Article 25 renews the centrality of armed struggle for the movement, articles 2, 18, 19 and 20 clearly reaffirm the movement's aspiration to liberate the whole of Palestine, and hence the impossibility to recognize Israel's legitimacy. Without contradicting its principles, article 20 also inscribes the movement's political realism:

"Hamas rejects any alternative to the full and complete liberation of Palestine, from the river to the sea. However, without compromising its rejection of the Zionist entity and without relinquishing any Palestinian rights, Hamas considers the establishment of a fully sovereign and independent Palestinian state, with Jerusalem as its capital along the lines of the 4th of June 1967, with the return of the refugees and the displaced to their homes from which they were expelled, to be a formula of national consensus."

As he publicly presented the charter, Hamas's leader Khaled Meshal stated: "[our] document [...] introduces a balanced, creative and authentic model: how to resist, to adhere to the rights of people and to the nationalist ideals; it does not look for compromises and does not play with principles; at the same time it remains with an open vision, on the regional and international context. It knows the laws of the conflict and how to manage it, when to advance and when to stay back." [4]

“All of those who still view us as an armed group, and nothing more, you don’t have any idea of what Hamas really looks like…. You focus on resistance, on the means rather than the goal—which is a state based on democracy, pluralism, cooperation. A state that protects rights and freedom, where differences are faced through words, not through guns. Hamas is much more than its military operations.” [9]

- Yahya Sinwar, leader of Hamas in Gaza, during an interview to an Italian journalist in 2018.

Hamas's acceptance of the principles of representative democracy has a long history. In 1990, Hamas refused to enter the PLO also due to the fact that the Palestinian National Council, the PLO's parliament meant to represent Palestinians in Palestine and abroad, did not pick its members through elections but rather through direct appointment from the PLO leadership [2].

Hamas participated in elections for the first time in 2004, and importantly in the national elections of 2006, where it ran a campaign based on the platform of "Taghayyr wa al-IslaH" (Change and Reform). The platform used a language close to that typical of Western democracy, calling for the "construct[ion of] an advanced Palestinian civil society based on political pluralism and alternation of power."

"[It] called for a separation of judiciary, executive, and legislative powers in the Western European mold. Most importantly, in the section entitled “Public Liberties and Citizens’ Rights,” the manifesto talked of citizens “equal before the law” and of “citizens equal in rights and duties” for whom “security and protection for his or her life and properties” had to be provided. Toward the general public, therefore, a policy of “equal opportunities” had to be adopted, “reinforcing the culture of dialogue and respect for all opinions that do not contradict the people’s faith or their civilisation heritage.” Within the general body of the citizenry, it was necessary to “guarantee women’s rights and accomplish the legislative frameworks for supporting them and endeavor to enable women to contribute in social, economic and political development,” as well as to “[highlight] the role of women in building the society,” albeit within an Islamic framework" [4].

Hamas's electoral manifesto clearly showed the conservative Islamic identity of the movement, for example by calling for Islam to be at foundation of education, on the grounds that it "dignifies the human being by striking a balance between individual rights and community rights", and by proposing to "shield women with Islamic education".

Still, analysts like Jeroen Gunning aruged that "the bulk of Hamas' election manifesto reads like that of any 'secular' political party. Its focus on housing, health, agricultural policy, improving education and scientific research, increasing government efficiency and reigning in the secuirty agencies is not ostensibly influeced by religion." [10]
