---
title: "Iran Wac War Between Ruling Beasts Capital War All Them War Capital Against Our Class"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/iran-wac-war-between-ruling-beasts-capital-war-all-them-war-capital-against-our-class"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "We received from Iran and we publish Read also: [PHS] Internationalist leaflet against the war between Iran and Israel and in Arabic"
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/iran-wac-war-between-ruling-beasts-capital-war-all-them-war-capital-against-our-class)

We received from Iran and we publish Read also: [PHS] Internationalist leaflet against the war between Iran and Israel and in Arabic

1. Two predatory and genocidal capitalist regimes have entered into war. The Israeli state and the Islamic regime, like all other capitalist states, are each more than the other, all of them are worker-killing, criminal, and warmongering to the core.

7. All that has been said, plus all other evidence, screams that the war is likely to continue. It will probably flare up more. Hunger, famine, lack of water, the plague-like deprivation of medicine, treatment, health, the disasters of homelessness, unemployment, displacement, poverty that have been rampant in all the previous years and decades will become more explosive and unbearable. The capitalist class and its military, police, and security machinery of repression and murder will fall more brutally on the lives of our comrades. Both sides of the war. All the war-making governments, both hostile genocidal blocs, will try with all their capacity to bring all the disasters, consequences, and sinister effects of the war on our class. The top and bottom, the starting and ending point of all this talk is that we must reverse the trend and turn the enemy’s dark scenario against itself. We must reverse the story. Let us destroy all the competitions, confrontations, conflicts, and wars against the warmongers, the governments, the genocidal bourgeoisie of countries, and against global capital. This is possible, we can do it, we have the potential to play this role. Stamping the impossible seal on what our class struggle has all the capacity to make possible is only the work of the misanthropic capitalist system and the international anti-human bourgeoisie. It is the nature of capital that every anti-capitalist desire, will, determination, and action of the workers of the world locks the impossible and stamps the impossible seal. The implementation of this sinister scenario is an inseparable part of the magical and fetishist power of commodity production and, at its highest level, capitalist production. The foundation of this system’s existence is based on “personalizing things and objectifying humans, making the product of the workers’ labour an all-powerful, active, and productive god, and the worker an obedient, speechless slave, without any will or role, in relation to the creation of his labour. Capital, with its dark nature, stamps the impossible on all possibilities of our class struggle and prevents us from pursuing our human liberation goals. These seals must be broken, these locks must be broken, the entire burden of war must be placed on the shoulders of the capitalist war-making governments, and this work must be pursued and advanced by beating the drum of the anti-capitalist class struggle with greater awareness, vigilance, wakefulness, and determination.

8. We declare with the loudest cries that their war is not our war. We are at war with both governments, both poles, all of capital. We consider any kind of convergence, harmony, alignment of any worker with any side of the war as a shameless and shameless act for capital and against our own movement, against our fellow masses. We are against war and we make this opposition an agenda only by proposing perspectives, horizons, expectations, strategies, solutions, remedies, alignments, fielding’s and clear and stormy anti-capitalist campaigns. The field, the platform, the environment of our class alignment, alignment and war is precisely the place where capital separates us from our work, deprives us of control over the fate of our work and production, deprives us of the thoughtful, growing, flourishing, and instructive practice of playing a strong, conscious role against wage labour, in planning, planning, and exercising control over our own work and life. The focus of our forces for a real class campaign against capitalism is here and against everything that capital has done and continues to do.

10. Wherever we are, every work centre, school, hospital, transportation network, commercial centre, place of sale, agriculture and industry, municipality, mine, house, neighbourhood, port, road and building area, sea, forest, land, air, let us join hands. We have anti-capitalist workers’ councils. Let us link the councils together, let us create a passionate nationwide council movement against wage slavery. Why should we consider this work as Martian, extraterrestrial, and dreamy??!! Just because the regime resorts to all kinds of repression to break our resolve? Doesn’t it do this with every strike, doesn’t it suppress every struggle of any number of masses of our class to increase the price of labour by any amount? Doesn’t our every breath of protest in any other area bombard social life? Has it not been hundreds of times more ferocious and harsher with the aim of imposing the veil on the lives of women and girls of our class. Why have we not retreated in each of these areas, we have stood, we have advanced, we have continued the struggle, but as soon as we talk about organizing the council, the universal power of our class fills the earth and time with it!! It is not possible!! It is utopian!! Do we??!! The answer is clear, capital, the octopus brainwashing devices of the wage slavery system, the education and training system, and the engineering of capitalist thoughts have instilled this in us. It has fossilized us in itself, to the extent that it has deprived us of the ability to think differently and contrary. A reality that is terrifying and must be rebelled against. This rebellion does not take place in the philosophy classroom. We must rush towards each other, make one voice, one comrade, one ally of the council. The living and present bonds within the home, the house, the neighbourhood, the workplace, the conditions of struggle, the turbulent focus of establishing the councils.

12. It may be asked what will happen to the demands, for example, the export of medicine, treatment, education, shelter, water, electricity, gas, from the domination of capitalist moneyed commodity trading? It is clear from the sun that the urgent order of work and struggle will be more fundamental and vital than ever, with the slogan of occupation, preparation for occupation, development. The more this preparation increases, the more our power to impose demands on the enemy will increase, and to the extent of this increase, the greater our victory will be.

13. We must enter the field as a class. We have no other choice. We have been running away from this work for hundreds of years and the dominant logic, universal and everywhere dominating our consciousness, has been: It cannot be done!! It is not possible!! First the class game, syndicalism, democracy, civil movements, rainbow revolutions, anti-imperialism, anti-fascism, federalism, the endless chain of wastelands in which to languish in them has become the black fate of generation after generation of our class. Finally, a day must begin, we believe that this day has come.

PUBLISHED ON: https://www.autistici.org/tridnivalka/wac-the-war-between-the-ruling-beasts-of-capital-the-war-of-all-of-them-is-the-war-of-capital-against-our-class/

Source: https://againstwagelabor.com/2025/06/16/the-war-between-the-ruling-beasts-of-capital-the-war-of-all-of-them-is-the-war-of-capital-against-our-class/

Source in Persian: https://alayhesarmaye.com/2025/06/15/_/5352/
