---
title: "Pre History Council Communism"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/pre-history-council-communism"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This list here is to examine the pre-history of Council Communism, tracing its ideological origins and early influences. It is hoped that by exploring key historical organizations, thinkers, and revolutionary ideas, the foundations that shaped Council Communism can be uncovered, and an insight into "
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/pre-history-council-communism)

The German Revolution, a huge influence on the development of council communism. This list here is to examine the pre-history of Council Communism, tracing its ideological origins and early influences.

It is hoped that by exploring key historical organizations, thinkers, and revolutionary ideas, the foundations that shaped Council Communism can be uncovered, and an insight into the political and social contexts that led to its rise as an alternative vision for workers' self-activity can be discovered.

Anton Pannekoek's Polemic with Karl Kautsky Mass Action and Revolution - Pannekoek's first direct reply to Karl Kautsky which signalled both Pannekoek's break with Kautsky and his move away from Orthodox Marxism of the 2nd International. This was written in response to Kautsky's article "The Action of the Mass" where he had attacked the Left Radicals. Kautsky on "The New Tactics" - Written in response to Kautsky's "The New Tactic" where he had attacked Pannekoek's previous article "Mass Action and Revolution". Marxist Theory and Revolutionary Tactics - Continuation of Pannekoek's polemics with Kautsky after the former's article "Kautsky on The New Tactics". In the End - Pannekoek's final text in his polemic with Karl Kautsky. This was written after Kautsky's text "The Latest Radicalism" where he had summarized the differences between his and Pannekoek's views while attacking the latter as a syndicalist. Anton Pannekoek in the Mass Strike Debate The Mass Strike Debate - Pannekoek's First Contribution to the Mass Strike Debate. Here he talks about the spiritual transformation taking place in German Social Democracy with the Mass Strike Debate as its primary symptom. The Aim of the Mass Strike - Pannekoek here talks about the significance and goal of the Mass Strike. This also partially replies to Karl Kautsky's article "A New Strategy". The Baden Revolt - Pannekoek analyses the peculiar state of affair in Baden where 66 delegates led by the revisionist Wilhelm Kolb had declared that they were gonna go against the Party and vote for the state budget. Two-way Tactical Battle - In this article, Pannekoek takes the side of Rosa Luxemburg who was under attack by the Centrists because Kurt Eisner had falsely evoked her criticisms of the leading party leadership on the question of Prussian voting rights to defend the behaviour of the Baden Parliamentary Group who had voted for a state budget in the Landtag. The Enemy as Teacher - Written in aftermath of Moritz von Bissing's circular which had led to the collapse of the Trade Unionist view of the Mass Strike which would've been initiated through the instructions of the leaders. Mass Actions - Written in response to an article by Kautsky and empasizes the difference between Mass Actions and earlier popular movements while also stating its role in overcoming the separation between organized and unorganized masses. The Belgian Teachings - Here Pannekoek talks about and draws lessons from the Belgian Elections of 1912 where the Social Democrats aligned with the Liberals to defeat the Catholic Party but failed. The Essence of our Present Demands - This was written in response to an article by Gustav Eckstein, an associate of Karl Kautsky, where he had attacked the demands of the Left Radicals. Popular Interest and Mass Action - Here Pannekoek talks about the popular nature of Mass Action where not just a section the great mass of people participate vigorously. Mass Strike Threat and Mass Strike Refusal - About the Mass Strikes in Belgium and Hungary. The Result of the Belgian Mass Strikes - About the Belgian Mass Strike of 1913. The Necessity of the Mass Strike - Here Pannekoek talks about the necessity of Mass Strike in the fight for Universal Suffrage in Prussia. The Difficulties of the Mass Strike - Here Pannekoek talks about the so-called difficulties that the Mass Strike will encounter according to the other Social Democrats. The Dangers of the Mass Strike - Here Pannekoek talks about the dangers that the state can pose for the workers, their organizations and the Mass Strike. The Path of Struggle - Pannekoek argues against the "wait-and-see" policy of Social Democrats, at a time when reactionary agitation is strong, in favour of the Mass Strike. Against the Mass Strike - Here Pannekoek talks about the growing fear among the German Bourgeois regarding the Mass Strike and hence its ever-growing relevance. Johann Knief The Peace Formula of the Social Patriots and Social Pacifists - By the Bremen left-radical and IKD member Johann Knief that criticizes the social patriots of the SPD and the social pacifists of the Kautsky group and also talks about the right to self-determination. The Policy of the Independents - By Johann Knief for the journal Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, this article criticizes the social pacifism of the Independents [USPD]. Bremen Arbeiterpolitik and the Unitary Organization The Foundation of a New Workers' Organization - By an unknown Bremen left-radical, Carl Volkmann, this article criticizes the separation between the Party and Trade Union and proposes for the first time the concept of "Unitary Organization" which in the future will be the AAU. The Trade Union and Political Struggle - An unsigned text from Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, this issues a call to go beyond leaders and the parliament and to form a Unitary Organization while still working in the Trade Unions. Trade Unions Issues - An article from the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, signed by someone called Fl. Geyer., this criticizes the party-union division. The Trade Union Leaders in Distress - First published in the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, this article talks about Trade Unions and specifically Adolf Braun. The text ends with a note by the editor of Arbeiterpolitik about the Unitary Organization. The Path to a Unitary Organization - An unsigned article from the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, this talks about the Unitary Organization and criticizes the Independents [USPD] for their inability to discuss about this newer form of organization. The Central Leadership of the USP on the Trade Union Question - Article from the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, signed under the word W, that criticized the view of the Independents' [USPD] leadership towards the Unitary Organization. Clarity, Collection, Organization - Published in the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, this unsigned text talks about Parliament as a supposed means for the proletariat. On the “Reorganization” of the Trade Unions - Article from the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik that examines and criticizes the functions of Trade Unions and their role during the war while showing Unitary Organization as a way out. Reflections on the Organizational Problem - Article in the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik arguing for newer forms of organization to overcome the Party-Trade Union separation. On the Unitary Organization - An article from a worker for the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik that talks about the Unitary Organization and criticizes the Trade Unions. Comments Indo

This is still very incomplete and needs much work. I'll keep updating this list as I continue to translate the texts. As of now I have certain texts from the following figures and journals to add to this list.

Johann Knief, Paul Frölich, Anton Pannekoek, Herman Gorter, Julian Borchardt, Henriette Roland-Holst, Sylvia Pankhurst, Barend Luteraan, Abraham Korper, Bremen Arbeiterpolitik, Die Nieuwe Tijd, Lichtstrahlen, Räte-Zeitung, De Internationale and De Roode Van.

Incase if anyone knows any more figures, journals or organizations then they can mention them here.

"Pre-history" conjures up the written records of the Way (the councils of 120), writings by Winstanley and Müntzer... In other words, sources of communist writings that are not named as such, although alluding to it. For example,

One day Kefa stood up to speak to the comrades—there were about a hundred and twenty people in the council,... And all who shared the creed owned everything in common; they sold their goods and possessions and distributed the proceeds among themselves according to what each one needed.

westartfromhere wrote: "Pre-history" conjures up the written records of the Way (the councils of 120), writings by Winstanley and Müntzer... In other words, sources of communist writings that are not named as such, although alluding to it

By pre-history is understood proto-history. In what sense do you write, "Pre-history..."?

The proto-history of the social-democracy (Left/Council Communism) of Pankhurst, Pannekoek, et al., can be found in the writings of Engels, Lassalle, Marx (Eleanor), et al.

For the proto-history of communism proper, earlier sources are cited.
