---
title: "Cuba Interview Movimiento Libertario Cubano"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/cuba-interview-movimiento-libertario-cubano"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "During mid-June 2008 the Iberian counter-information collective A Las Barricadas posed several questions to the MLC… The complete text of this interview follows."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/cuba-interview-movimiento-libertario-cubano)

During mid-June 2008 the Iberian counter-information collective A Las Barricadas posed several questions to the MLC… The complete text of this interview follows.

We’re interviewing the Cuban Libertarian Movement (Movimiento Libertario Cubano – MLC), an organization made up of anarchists in exile in different parts of the world. In these days of apparent change, of transition, as the European and North-American media would have it, it’s of interest to know first hand about what’s happening inside the island. The demise of Fidel Castro has opened up all sorts of speculation about the future of the communist regime due to the first measures the new chief, Raul Castro, has taken. Here’s the interview:

ALB – Hello compas. Let’s begin the interview with some notes on history for our readers. Could you briefly explain the history of the anarchist movement in Cuba? MLC – Hello! Whoever wants to learn the history of our movement must begin with the work of our comrade Frank Fernandez, _Cuban Anarchism_, published in various languages. In general, the epic described is very similar to that of the anarchist movement in the rest of Latin America with the peculiarity that the late independence of Cuba finds our people involved in that struggle. The first Cuban unions likewise find many anarchists in their midst to be their main animators and such influence continues in certain production sectors until the 50’s, in open confrontation with the Batista dictatorship. Our participation in the struggles of the day came precisely from these syndicates, from the Cuban Libertarian Association (Asociación Libertaria Cubana) and in a smaller measure by comrades affiliated with the 26 of July Movement (Movimiento 26 de Julio). It is noteworthy that during the 50’s the Cuban anarchist movement was one of the most active among its peers in Latin America and took active part in different encounters such as the Anarchist Conference that took place in Montevideo in April 1957, which explicitly supported the struggle by the Cuban people against the Batista dictatorship. ALB – Something that people in Europe and elsewhere don’t know: What was the role of the Cuban anarchists in the Cuban revolution? MLC – As we have mentioned, we anarchists rose to the task within our possibilities and from our own revolutionary point of view in the struggle against the dictatorship. Indeed, we joined the general jubilation after the defeat of the Batista forces and the dissolution of its army. However, we also from the beginning maintained an early attitude of mistrust with towards the cult of personality, leadership, nationalist and militarist proclivities incarnated in Fidel Castro and his inner circle. This mistrust was soon justified and reinforced: for example, the direct intervention by Fidel Castro manipulating the X Congress of the Confederation of Cuban Workers (X Congreso de la Confederación de Trabajadores de Cuba) for the benefit of his group and violating the principles of the worker movement’s autonomy. From then on, Cuban anarchists became more radical in their suspicions and adopted a clear stand against the incipient centralization of political power. All this is recorded in a manifest where we openly expressed our fears of the attempts to amass control by the Catholic Church as well as by the Communist Party whose most notorious cadres enjoyed political positions and sinecures during the Batista dictatorship. We’re aware that not everybody in the international anarchist movement shared our critical attitude and not a few kept to the expectative for many years regarding a process that continued monopolizing the meaning of a revolution by then devoid of any revolutionary spirit. Today, and for a long time now, we think it’s no longer debatable that the positions of those Cuban anarchists of 50 years ago proved completely on target. In short, it was nothing but the classic position from the 1st International that revolutions are not promoted, encouraged or radicalized by “revolutionary” governments but that within them you find the bureaucratic and authoritarian germ that ends up by suffocating and annihilating the revolution and imposing itself as the new dominant class in the new State. ALB – Could you talk about the exile? Was there understanding, support, or on the contrary alienation? MLC – We can’t talk in the past tense yet. We are still many Cuban anarchists in exile in many parts of the planet. Our exile is as hard as any other exile in terms of separation and alienation with the aggravation that the first comrades who got out of Cuba didn’t have any other choice but to establish themselves in such a hostile milieu as the United States; something not habitually understood but such has been the inexorable destiny to be followed, at least in principle, by Cuban refugees of all times. Most painful was to come face to face with the lack of understanding and alienation we got from certain anarchist groups of Europe and Latin America that would have liked to see us integrated in a transformation that was initially uncritically favored. Not all anarchist groups, of course, reacted the same way and we also received countless displays of solidarity that grew with the years as the Cuban political regime unveiled its true face. Today, those debates from the 60’s have been totally overcome and there isn’t one sane anarchist that still can think about a libertarian evolution coming from a political regime based on absolute control of its subjects and the super-exploitation of the workers; without autonomous organizations independent of the state acting as bulk wards in the struggle against such “super-exploitation” by the state and capital; remember that there are a multitude of capitalist enterprises based in the Spanish State, Canada, Mexico, Japan, France, Italy, etc. ALB – Let’s talk about the present; Fidel has retired leaving in his place his brother. What has changed in Cuba? MLC – In our last public declaration – “Something smells different in Cuba”, May 2008 – we tried to clarify that “the changes” happening in Cuba are merely cosmetic and only attempt to generate a “liberalizing” image that doesn’t change the basic functioning of the regime and the institutional power structure: State capitalism, privileges for the haute state bureaucracy and particularly for the armed forces, monopolization by the only party of all the mechanisms of self-expression and decision-making, absolute control over the population, etc. Nevertheless, what is changing is the general attitude of the people: today you can see that the people are losing their fear of repression and have begun to conquer space; the hardships of everyday life can no longer remain hidden and everybody knows it; there are the beginnings of protest more or less organized, etc. All this points the way to possible courses of action: our expectations lay on them and we harbor no illusions with respect to a summit of power that is only trying to win more time. ALB – In Europe there are reports about the lines that Cubans have to make to buy cell phones or to get internet (among other things), are we going into a spiral of consumerism? MLC – No, consumerism is not possible in Cuba given that the main worry is to solve the most elemental and immediate things: food, housing, transportation etc. Even more: worker’s salaries do not even cover these needs and they must recur to the rationing book with all its scarcities. What we have in Cuba is a surplus of foreign currency in possession of those who get remittances from their families abroad: this surplus allows for such “luxuries” as computers and cell phones whose purchase has only recently been permitted. The economic debacle the regime is in is of such proportions that at this moment it is quite possible that the remittances of foreign currency surpass the sum of all of the country’s salaries, without exaggeration. This also explains the fact that that approximately 20% of the population of Havana has no interest in getting jobs. Why would somebody who receives some economic help from abroad – always more than the US$20 monthly mean salary – want to work? The regime has no answers to this type of thing and continues in vain the appeals to sacrifice and labor discipline in exchange for nothing, while the ruling class have access to the best goods and services available. Paradoxically there is much unemployment among the social classes historically dispossessed that survive against the current, doing whatever it takes, street peddling, prostitution and expropriation. This – together with a strong racism – institutional and cultural – explains why Cuban jails are full of young Afro-Cubans.

ALB – For several years now news from the MLC appear in the international libertarian press. What is your relationship with other anarchists throughout the world? MLC – The MLC aspires to better relations with the international anarchist movement. For a good period of time we have overcome diverse resistances and we have strengthened many of our alliances. Many groups have established firm priorities in terms of solidarity with Cuban anarchists such as Group of Support to Independent Libertarians and Syndicalists in Cuba (GALSIC) and Venezuela’s El Libertario, www.nodo50.org/ellibertario. Frank Fernandez’s historical work about our movement has been accepted in the Spanish State by the Anselmo Lorenzo Foundation (Fundación Anselmo Lorenzo), in Italy by Zero in Conduct (Zero in Condotta), in the United States by See Sharp Press and so on. Also, we have worked to make clear our solidarity with anarchist groups everywhere and from the most contemporary currents. This has been possible thanks to the MLC’s configuration which doesn’t exactly follow the pattern of a proper organization but rather has been developing as a coordinating network for Cuban anarchists wherever they may be, and this covers a wide gamut of positions, from anarcho-syndicalism, specifism, neo-platformism, primitivism, insurrectionalism, eco-anarchism and even anarcho-punk; no matter how contradictory or incompatible they might be since the axis or principal motif of this coordination is the solidarity with anarchist comrades, autonomous and independent syndicalists and counter-cultural collectives with the clear objective of fostering a widespread anti-authoritarian movement that will allow the continuity of anarchist ideals so brusquely pruned –but not severed – by the bourgeois dictatorship of the Castro brothers. Probably there are comrades who still have certain reservations as there are some who still perceive the Cuban State and its governing elite as a revolutionary socialist force. But these cases today are the exception and tend to become merely anecdotic as time goes by. Sooner or later, the MLC is an integral part of the anarchist international movement at the level of any other and soon nobody will doubt it. ALB – What do you expect will happen in the island in a few years? MLC – We have spoken about it in previous interviews. Basically we trust in people’s capacity for autonomous organization and there we put our expectations. It’s not a matter of waiting for the ripe fruit to fall but rather to join, within our possibilities, those formative processes of revolutionary anti-authoritarian and self-managed currents inside Cuba. We believe the situation has already produced more than enough reasons for this to happen but we also know that the political regime and the elite in power have been able to act to contain such manifestations to their minimal expression. We are not ignorant of the difficulties faced by militant work in that direction and we also know too well the efficiency demonstrated by the State’s security organisms –the only efficient aspect of the regime – but we will not stop our efforts because that is our only reason for being. ALB – Lastly, what is the MLC? What kind of people makes it up? MLC – We have already commented on this. The MLC is a network of Cuban anarchists. As anarchists we are not different from other anarchists who face the domination relationships and the webs of power in which they exist except for the fact – certainly weird – that in our case we face a hierarchical society and a ruling class that still finds justification in the name of “revolution” and “socialism”. The MLC is made up of people who live of their work and who in our everyday lives conduct ourselves by the incorruptible desire to build relationships among free and equal men and women in solidarity. From a generational point of view, the nucleus that tries to maintain alive the anarchist ethos today is no longer composed in its majority –due to obvious biological reasons – by the first group of exiles from the 60’s that founded the MLC in the city of New York, but rather by those of us who had to leave the island in the 70’s, 80’s and 90’s. ALB – Are there anarchists inside Cuba? How about libertarian groups in exile outside the MLC?

MLC – We know of no other anarchist groups in exile outside the MLC, but it wouldn’t bother us at all if there were, in this case we would try to find them quickly and explore the possibilities of joint actions. In the 80’s two editorial collectives co-existed, one of them around the journal Guangara Libertaria and the other with A Mayor and both co-existed as a coordinating network under the same acronym. As to the existence of anarchists inside Cuba, we can emphatically confirm that they do exist and have been doing so clandestinely and underground for the last half century. The big problem in this case is that those who remained in Cuba have been systematically suppressed each time they dared demonstrate publicly as happened with the agricultural syndicalists of the Zapata Group towards the end of the 70’s and beginning of the 80’s. This is one of the reasons why the anarchists inside have taken great care not to be identified as such and have managed to survive in the shadows. Besides, during the last few years there has been a movement by anti-establishment counter-culture youths that constitutes the ferment for the emergence of a spontaneous kind of anarchism that doesn’t yet have possibilities in the literal sense of the word or in the deeper sense of continued collective praxis. The truth is that surely there are in Cuba many more anarchists than we can even imagine: the spontaneous forms of rebellion that happen are the best breeding grounds for it. One of the immediate challenges we have is to achieve fluidity in these relationships with the “inside”, something that the “prohibitions” continue to present obstacles to. ALB – What is your relationship with other opposition groups? MLC – The MLC doesn’t keep formal or stable relations with any group of the so-called opposition; among other things because many of them would be our mortal enemies, if we were all active inside Cuba. It is imperative to be clear on this. The image presented by the most vociferous Cuban exiles is nothing but an attempt to re-instate capitalism – that is, to continue the task begun by the government but incorporating in it the private Cuban capital accumulation from abroad – and holding democratic elections under a parliamentary and party system. But we are anarchists and if such a project would take hold in Cuba we would also be against it. On the other hand, it is clear that there is a fraction of the Cuban exile that, without self-describing as strictly anarchist, agrees with us in vague terms defending a liberalizing and self-managed line, many times even among former socialists or members of the PCC (Cuban Communist Party), today self-described as Trotskyites, Luxemburgists etc. It is possible there wouldn’t be too many problems talking with them, but it is a diffuse and disorganized segment of the exile. Remember also that the exile, in its totality doesn’t correspond, in any way, to the image the Castro propaganda shows which only recognizes the so-called “Miami Mafia” which includes ex-batistians, anexionists, neo-liberals, narco-trafficers and ultranationalists. No! The Cuban exile is composed of a majority of working class people who survive out of the sweat of their brow. We’re talking about a noble people genuinely inspired by the establishment of a set of basic freedoms and respect for human rights inside the island: people who do not have a well defined political project but who want to simply be able to write, travel, organize freely, sing, paint, or do whatever they want without needing the state’s permission. Or simply people who want to go back, to work without exploiting anybody and live decently. With this type of people –the great majority of those in exile – we maintain fraternal relations in whatever part of the world it is our fate to live. It is not about a shared revolutionary program but about the elementary respect that honest, simple working people in Cuba or anywhere else deserve. Translation: Luis Jose Prat. Original in Spanish: http://www.alasbarricadas.org/noticias/?q=node/7980
