---
title: "Marxs Models And Actual Capitalism"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/marxs-models-and-actual-capitalism"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Blog post about Marx&#039;s Capital, what it is and isn&#039;t, partially in reply to Joseph Kay."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/marxs-models-and-actual-capitalism)

This is the best of all possible worlds Blog post about Marx's Capital, what it is and isn't, partially in reply to Joseph Kay.

In my view, Karl Marx's analysis of capitalism is really powerful and important. I think the best formulation of this analysis is in his book Capital, Volume 1. Joseph Kay recently wrote a blog post about a book I've not read yet, by David Graeber, and that post made me want to write this post about aspects of Marx. Joseph described Marx as writing an immanent critique of capitalist economics. I understand this to mean that Marx tried to take on ideas about capitalism on their own terms and show how they have internal problems. I think this is a good way to understand Capital, Volume 1. (I'm just going to call it Capital from here on out.) In this blog post I lay out some further points about what I think Marx is and is not doing, matters that I think are useful for reading Marx.

What Capital presents is a sort of perfected capitalism, it's capitalism without any accidents, capitalism as presented by the ideologues of capitalism. In the Grundrisse Marx uses the phrase "rational abstraction" to mean a useful general model that helps us to think about various things in the world and society. Marx's presentation of capitalism is a rational abstraction: it's a general model of capitalism. This general model has a few uses. For one thing, it helps to show that any form of capitalism will be unjust. Injustice under capitalism isn't an accident, it's at the core of capitalism: capitalism is unjust. A perfected capitalism will still generate immoral outcomes. For another, it shows some of the general dynamics of capitalism as a social system - some things we can expect to see some of the time regularly in capitalist societies.

Both of these things are useful. It's important, though, that we not mistake Marx's model for actually existing capitalism. This is something that Joseph talks about in his post. Joseph quotes Graeber saying that many readers of Marx forget the "as if" quality of Marx's critical analysis of capitalism, which is to say, people forget that Marx's work present a model, not actual capitalism. The model of capitalism that Marx presents is really powerful, but that model is not the same thing as knowing the history of what actually existing capitalism has been, including the range of different forms that capitalist societies and capitalist enterprises have taken.

In the preface to v2 of Capital, Engels says something that can be read as compatible with this. He writes that

“Marx’s surplus value (…) represents the general form of the sum of values appropriated without any equivalent by the owners of the means of production (…) many intermediate links are required to arrive from an understanding of surplus-value in general at an understanding of (…) the laws of the distribution of surplus-value within the capitalist class.” (10.)

Marx's model doesn’t just give us what actually happened in the history of capitalism or present capitalism. It gives us some concepts to use that help us conduct analysis of capitalism.

In the rest of this post I'm going to list a few places were I think we can see Marx suggesting himself that his work is dealing in models, or at least places where Marx seems amenable to that interpretation of his work. There are a few places where Marx suggests or implicitly admits that his model of capitalism is not the same thing as the reality of capitalism. For example, in Wage Labour and Capital, Marx wrote that:

"The actual price of a commodity (…) stands always above or below the cost of production (…) the price of a commodity is indeed determined by its cost of production, but in such a manner that the periods in which the price of these commodities rises above the costs of production are balanced by the periods in which it sinks below the cost of production, and vice versa. Of course this does not hold good for a single given product of an industry, but only for that branch of industry. So also it does not hold good for an individual manufacturer, but only for the whole class of manufacturers."

That is to say, when Marx talks about the labor theory of value and the determination of commodity prices by the labor time required to make commodities, he means it in very, very general terms. The point about the value of commodities was again a matter of Marx dealing with models and rational abstractions. Under a perfected, accident-free capitalism, Marx argues, commodities would be priced at the labor time it took to produce them. And that perfect pricing would be exploitive, because waged labor involves capitalists owning and selling goods that workers make, and the capitalists get to keep the additional value added to the goods by workers' labor. Workers aren't paid the value that we add to the goods and services our employers sell.

Another place were we can see the status of Marx's model as a model is on chapter 26 of Capital. Here Marx writes about the violence that helped make capitalism possible in the first place. He calls this primitive accumulation. He writes that primitive accumulation "in different countries, assumes different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, and at different periods. In England alone, which we take as our example, has it the classic form." The actual history of capitalism has varied tremendously. Marx focused on just one example of capitalist society, that of England, in order to build his model for understanding capitalism in general. This is powerful conceptually, but it makes it hard to tell the difference between traits of English capitalism and capitalism as such. It's also not necessarily the case that Marx always drew that line correctly - that is, it's not always clear that Marx was right when he said something was part of English capitalism or part of capitalism as such.

In chapter 24 of Capital, Marx distinguishes between capitalists re-investing their money in order to make more money and capitalists spending their money for their own enjoyment. The first, investing money to make money, creates more capital. The second "consumes or expends it as revenue." Marx adds that some of the time he analytically treats the same thing differently. That is, he has two different ways of discussing the wealth that capitalists extract from workers. Some of the time he discusses it "solely as a fund for supplying the individual consumption of the capitalist." That's what Marx means by revenue. Other times he treats it "solely as a fund for accumulation," which is to say, solely as a matter of capitalists spending money to make more money. Marx points out that in actual social practice, capitalists' wealth is "neither the one nor the other, but is both together. One portion is consumed by the capitalist as revenue, the other is employed as capital, is accumulated," which is to say, wealth expended to create more wealth for capitalists.

Marx adds that through Capital he treats capitalists "as personified capital." Capitalism as a social system exerts pressures that encourage capitalists to act in certain ways - to live up to the character type of "personified capital" - but no actual people are really just personified capital and nothing more. Marx's point is an analytical one. By creating this character type who is only a capitalist and nothing else - that is, someone who cares only about the creation of wealth for it's own sake - Marx can get at some of the core dynamics of capitalism. In actual social reality we never see this pure capitalism where capitalists are personified capital and nothing more. To the degree that capitalists are personified capital, the money they spend for their own personal consumption - money spent as revenue, Marx calls it - is money wasted, because it's money that could have been spent making even more wealth. Marx writes that "So far (…) as his actions are a mere function of capital — endowed as capital is, in his person, with consciousness and a will — his own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on accumulation." Of course, actual existing capitalists don't just care about capital accumulation. They also spend their wealth on things they enjoy and which don't add to the creation of greater wealth - the expansion of their wealth is their primary priority in general, but it's not their only priority all the time in all places. To put it another way, actually existing capitalists rarely conform 100% to the logic of the capitalist system. Capitalism is a system which rewards and encourages economistic behavior, and the best of Marx and the marxist tradition is an attack on that.

In chapter 10 of Capital, Marx notes that at this point in the book he has made an assumption that workers under capitalism in general are legally and formally free. He further notes that this assumption isn't really accurate to the history of actually existing capitalism. It's another rational abstraction. He writes that "as far as we have at present gone only the independent labourer, and therefore only the labourer legally qualified to act for himself, enters as a vendor of a commodity into a contract with the capitalist. If, therefore, in our historical sketch, on the one hand, modern industry, on the other, the labour of those who are physically and legally minors, play important parts, the former was to us only a special department, and the latter only a specially striking example of labour exploitation.”

In chapter 15 of Capital, Marx again not this analytical assumption and how it differs from the actual history of capitalism. Here he begins to suggest that this assumption should be abandoned. He notes that in the early part of the book, "Taking the exchange of commodities as our basis, our first assumption was that capitalist and labourer met as free persons, as independent owners of commodities; the one possessing money and means of production, the other labour-power." That is, the first several chapters of Capital assumed that the working class worked for wages under relatively free circumstances, in the sense that they were compelled by the need to have wages and not by external force.

To put it another way, early in Capital the book assumes formally, legally free workers are the normal workers under capitalism. In chapter 15, however, Marx puts this assumption to the test of some aspects of the actual history of English capitalism. Marx notes that the introduction of machinery in various industries led to greater employment of women and children. These workers were not formally and legally free but rather legally disqualified. Marx writes that "now the capitalist buys children and young persons under age. Previously, the workman sold his own labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent. Now he sells wife and child. He has become a slave-dealer." Marx here claims that there is a growth in the use of legally disqualified workers under capitalism, breaking the assumption of legally and formally free workers. Marx also probably underestimates the degree to which the working class was never all that formally and legally free. It's not clear to me if this underestimation is another methodological assumption on Marx's part or something he just got wrong.

These examples I've listed are moments when Marx seems to let on that he is dealing in models. Marx's models are useful conceptually, but less so if we forget that they're models. Marx used his models in part for this usefulness, but also in part because he was engaged with classical political economists. Political economists dealt largely with theoretical models. (I'm told the same is largely true of economists today, though their models are much more mathematically presented these days.) Marx learned from and criticized political economists and, as Joseph Kay wrote, he conducted an immanent critique of them. This meant dealing in models just as political economists did.

In my view, Marx's models are very useful for thinking about capitalism and people should read volume 1 of Capital. (I recommend starting it with chapter 26 and reading to the end, then starting at the beginning and reading to the end. Or, read chapter 26 to the end, then chapter 4 through 25, then the first three chapters. The first three chapters are like the beginning of the movie The Usual Suspects: the ending totally changes the meaning of the beginning. Except the beginning of Capital is much more dull than that film.) I plan to read that Graeber book that Joseph reviewed. I would like to recommend a few other books here that I find useful alongside Marx. They're not primarily theoretical works, though they're smart sophisticated works.

One is the short book Historical Capitalism by Immanuel Wallerstein. The book collects some talks Wallerstein gave. In the beginning of the book Wallerstein makes a comment that speaks to what I've been saying here and what Joseph and Graeber talk about with regard to Marx and readings of Marx. Wallerstein described a limitation in a lot of things "written about capitalism by Marxists and others on the left," namely the fault of "logico-deductive analyses, starting from definitions of what capitalism was thought to be in essence, and then seeing how far it had developed in different places and times." Wallerstein instead aimed “to see capitalism as a historical system, over the whole of its history and in concrete unique reality.” Wallerstein suggest that Marx moved back and forth between these two approaches. For Wallerstein, this is a “tension in [Marx's] presentation of his work between the exposition of capitalism as a perfected system (which had never in fact existed historically) and the analysis of the concrete day-to-day reality of the capitalist world.” The rest of Wallerstein's book sketches elements of the over-all history of capitalism in his interpretation. It's worth a read, especially alongside Marx's Capital.

In addition to Wallerstein's book, I'd also highly recommend Michael Perelman's excellent book The Invention of Capitalism. Perelman compares the public writings of classical political economists with the journals and letters and the political and policy writings of those political economists during early capitalism and the transition to capitalist society. Their more public writings tended to treat markets as self-constituting and self-regulating but their private writings and their political interventions showed a keen understanding of the role of the state and of violence in creating and maintaining capitalism. The book is useful for its reminder that some capitalist ideologists know full well that their hymns to markets are ideological and false.

I would also highly recommend that people who want to understand the history of actually existing capitalism should engage with some recent-ish writings on the history of slavery, in particular Gavin Wright's short and very readable book Slavery and American Economic Development, Dale Tomich's book Through the Prism of Slavery and Walter Johnson's essay "The Pedestal and the Veil." Often slavery has been conceptually defined as not-capitalist or as pre-capitalist. Marx often discussed capitalism and slavery this way. This assumption is little more than an assertion about how to define the words capitalism and slavery - "if there's slavery it's not full capitalism, because we define full capitalism as not involving slavery" - and it's not an illuminating definition. The reality of the history of slavery and capitalism is that they're complicated - not all capitalism involved slavery and not all slavery was noncapitalist. In particular, the southern United States became a society which was no less capitalist than the north, it was just differently capitalist. The U.S. Civil War was a war between two different capitalist governments.

I'm going to end this blog post in a moment, with two quotes from E.P. Thompson, which I already posted in the discussion on Joseph Kay's blog post. As I read Marx, Marx's work in Capital was motivated by a sense like what Thompson expressed. Marx understood capitalism as a social system that limited human possibilities, and in ways that could and should be done away with. Marx's metaphors sometimes show this, like when he talks about capitalists coining the blood of children into money. As someone who buried several of his children, Marx wouldn't have used that imagery lightly. Marx's judgements motivated his immanent critique of capitalism and the ideas of political economists, and these judgments are pretty clear in Marx's writings, but most of Capital is spent developing the models.

The injury which advanced industrial capitalism did, and which the market society did, was to define human relations as being primarily economic. Marx engaged with orthodox political economy, and proposed revolutionary economic man as the answer to exploited economic man. But it is also implicit, particularly in the early Marx, that the injury is in defining man as “economic” at all.”

“While one form which opposition to capitalism takes is in direct economic antagonism – resistance to exploitation whether as producer or consumer – another form is, exactly, resistance to capitalism’s innate tendency to reduce all human relationships to economic definitions. The two are inter-related, of course; but it is by no means certain which may prove to be, in the end, more revolutionary. (…) [People] desire, fitfully, not only direct economic satisfactions, but also to throw off this grotesque “economic” disguise which capitalism imposes upon them, and to resume a human shape.”

Just saw this article about the role of slavery in the history of U.S. capitalism. It's very good. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-01-24/how-slavery-led-to-modern-capitalism-echoes.html

Another point where Marx says "I'm talking in terms of models, for the sake of conceptual clarity" then points out the distance between the model as he's presented it so far and actually-existing capitalism:

"we have assumed in our illustration that the capital-value of the quantity of commodities created at the stage of production is equal to the total sum of the value originally advanced in the form of money; or, in other words, that the entire capital-value advanced in the form of money passes on in bulk from one stage to the next. But we have seen that a part of constant capital, the labour instruments proper (e.g., machinery), continually serve anew, with more or less numerous repetitions of the same process of production, hence transfer their values piecemeal to the products. It will be seen later to what extent this circumstance modifies the circular movement of capital."

hey Revol, thanks for that. I've marked the Harvey lecture to view but haven't seen it yet. That lecture series is what made me sit down and start reading v2 again. I've had a similar experience w/ v2 as I first had w/ v1. I tried for years to read v1 and kept giving and feeling stupid. I once made it as far as 180 pages into v2 before breaking off. This time around I'm trying to avoid taking notes and making it all make sense, just going for broad strokes rather than all the details. I'd like to get a bit further then start the Harvey videos and read at the pace he's suggesting. Speaking of which, is there a list somewhere of how much of the book each video goes with?

More from volume 2 of Capital, places where Marx flags the difference between his theoretical assumptions and actual capitalism. Marx writes that in considering exchanges under capitalism, we should think of them as "not merely replacement of one commodity by another, but replacement with value-relations remaining the same. we assume that this takes place here. As a matter of fact, however, the values of the means of production vary. It is precisely capitalist production to which continuous change of value-relations is peculiar, if only because of the ever changing productivity of labour that characterize this mode of production." (72.) Marx then says that he will deal with this issue in detail later, which means among other things that at different points in his writing Marx has different models and assumptions in mind.

Marx writes a few pages later that in his initial discussion of what he calls simple reproduction he was "assuming that the entire surplus value is spent as revenue. In reality under normal conditions a part of the surplus value must always be spent as revenue and another part must be capitalised." He then says that he makes this assumption in part "in order not to complicate the formula," which is to say, he makes this point for the sake of theoretical simplicity and clarity. This clarity helps us think, as long as we don't mistake the clarity of the theory for the idea that the world operates in such clean categories. Marx also points out that he is dealing with capitalism "on average" and that "the general formula can represent only the average movement" within capitalism. Again this is a case of Marx dealing with models or abstractions, and in a way that he notes openly.

I just found these quotes which speak to the stuff in this post about slavery.

‎"the idea that "free" market capitalism corresponds best with "free" wage labour (...) appears not only in liberal theory but also in the work of authors such as Marx. In Capital we read that free wage labour is the only "true" capitalist way to commodify labour power. Marx states emphatically that "labour-power can appear on the market as a commodity only if, and so far as, its possessor, the individual whose labour-power it is, offers it for sale or sells it as a commodity." Traditional interpretations of the working class are based on this idea. After all, if only the labour power of free wage labourers is commodified, the "real" working class in capitalism can only consist of such workers. (...) Marx's thesis is based on two dubious assumptions, namely that labour needs to be offered for sale by the person who is the actual bearer and owner of such labour, and that the person who sells the labour sells nothing else. Why does this have to be the case? Why can labour not be sold by a party other than the bearer? What prevents the person who provides labour (his or her own or that of somebody else) from offering packages combining the labour with labour means? And why can a slave not perform wage labour for his master at the estate of some third party? Asking these questions brings us very close to the idea that slaves, wage-labourers, share-croppers, and others are in fact an internally differentiated proletariat. The target approach is therefore one that "eliminates as a defining characteristic of the proletarian the payment of wages to the producer." The main point appears to be that labour is commodified, although this commodification may take on many different forms. (...) Although the relative importance of "free" wage labour gradually increased, capitalism continued to accommodate various modes of labour control, ranging from share-cropping and self-employment to forced labour and outright slavery."

http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/llt/52/linden.html

Just starting reading Martin Sklar's book The Corporate Reconstruction of American Capitalism. Relevant quotes:

Sklar says we should "approach (...) capitalism and the capitalist class (...) not as static categories but as social formations changing in time. Specifically, with respect to capitalists, it means that they should be studied not simply, and certainly not in essence, as "interests," but, like, say, workers and farmers, as a social movement or social movements. No less than other classes, the capitalist class consists of associated people with goals, values, ideas, and principles, as well as interests." (2.)

Along similar lines, we shouldn't view particular ways to organize or institutionalize capitalism as "the natural outcome of "objective" techno-economic evolution." Rather, capitalist "historical development proceeded through human agency in such forms as social movements, political and ideological conflict, struggles over the shape and role of the law and government, and so on, and in such ways as usually to yielded wide disparities between intentions and consequences." (3.)

When Marx wrote the Communist Manifesto (1848?), he aimed his criticism at capitalism even though there was hardly a single clearly capitalist controlled nation in Europe. The crowned heads were still on their thrones. The aristocracy held the heights of power.

Today, the capitalists are in the same position the aristocracy held in 1848. Nevertheless, we still aim our criticism at the capitalists instead of at the new emerging ruling class: the professionals. If we want to learn from Marx, we should see the growing power and arrogance of this new elite.

Gotta go back over Sklar's book and cull quotes. Another book I read that's relevant here, James Livingston, Origins of the Federal Reserve System. Part of the book's over all argument is that while capitalists respond to systemic pressures, capitalists' actions are still cultural and political and require capitalists and their states to organize people in real time, so that narrowly economistic explanations don't explain what all happens in actual capitalism.

Nate, you miss the point of Marx's method and of Capital in general, I am sorry to say. He starts in the abstract (the commodity, value etc) and then goes into the concrete (primitive accumulation and history) in order to better explain capitalism based on certain principles. You seem to confuse this with him just simply critiquing other peoples models? Does he criticize Smith, Ricardo and Say? Of course! But, he also goes about to explain how things actually do work (in contrast to their explanations), why else would he be critiquing the bourgeois economists' mistakes and prejudices? Just for a good laugh? As a joke? Marx doesn't accept their assumptions, he destroys them and moves on to truthful ones.

Also, I seriously suggest that people who want to start reading Capital, start with an open mind and do not read companions or primers or introductions, other people have too many different interpretations and one needs to meet Marx on his own terms (I would say the same thing about any author actually!).

I also suggest that people do not read Capital (or any other book) out of order, the chapters come in a certain order for a reason. if the book was meant to be read starting with the last chapter, than the author would have ordered it in that fashion. [Not to say you cannot re-read it in any fashion you want to later on for clarification! :)]

It's hard to respond to a claim about what I do or don't understand about Marx when you don't quote or paraphrase-and-identify anything I wrote or anything Marx wrote. Then again, discussions about Marx's method are a rabbit hole I don't currently have the time or the interest in disappearing down. So I'm probably not going to respond further on this line of discussion. All I'll say here is the following

My over all point was that Marx's generalized depictions of capitalism are not descriptions of actually existing capitalism and should not be mistaken for such. When not mistaken for such, Marx's work is incredibly powerful. When people do mistake them for such, people tend to get a lot wrong about actual capitalism.

And, it sounds here like you're saying the more empirical and evidence-based parts of Capital are mostly just illustrations of the more abstract parts. If that's not what you mean, then I'm pleased to be wrong. If it is what you mean, that seems false to me, and undervalues what are in my view some of the best parts of that book.

The only reason I have opinions about the order in which people read v1 of Capital is that I really want people to read the book. The only worthwhile reason to read Capital v1 out of order is that people are more likely to actually read the book then. That's my experience anyway, after being in and facilitating several Capital study groups. I'm fine with saying "start w/ the beginning and read to the end." Totally. People should try that. If it works, fuck yeah. If it doesn't work, and a lot of people have that experience, then read it in a different order.

What Capital presents is a sort of perfected capitalism, it's capitalism without any accidents, capitalism as presented by the ideologues of capitalism.

When I read that I cringed because it just doesn't fit into my knowledge of Capital. I know that in this article you are only talking about vol1, but you should consider what Marx talks about in Capital as a whole. I think that it doesn't make sense to write about just vol 1 or vol 1 and 2. Maybe part of the issue is that the author has not read vol 3? It really is a unitary body of work and to not include material or ideas from vol 3 is a real shame.

Marx's generalized depictions of capitalism are not descriptions of actually existing capitalism and should not be mistaken for such. When not mistaken for such, Marx's work is incredibly powerful. When people do mistake them for such, people tend to get a lot wrong about actual capitalism.

this paragraph is confusing me for some reason. If Marx's generalized depictions are incorrect, in a general way, to how capitalism works, then his analyses would be useless. However, if his generalized depiction simply miss exceptions that exist here and there (and in any generalized picture we should expect that) then what is the point of this article? Are you saying that Marx's conclusions are incorrect or that he is logically inconsistent? Are you saying that his value-theory is wrong as compared to existing capitalism? Are you saying that his theory of surplus-value is not true to real life? What is a good example, besides some of the more obvious or ridiculous, of people incorrectly mistaking Marx's work as a description of how capitalism works in general? Or are you saying that these models are simply not useful for revolutionaries and we should just stick to the passionate judgments Marx levels at Capitalism?

(On an aside: Vol 3 is the book where everything previously written comes together. In Vol 3, Marx presents why he thinks Capitalism doesn't work on it's own terms, not just why it is a moral failure, but a material failure for mankind. Marx doesn't say that the collapse of Capitalism is inevitable, but he explains why re-occurring crises are inevitable. In short, it's because capitalist firms are driven to use more machines than humans, even though only labor produces value so this undermines the system as a whole.)

And, it sounds here like you're saying the more empirical and evidence-based parts of Capital are mostly just illustrations of the more abstract parts . If that's not what you mean, then I'm pleased to be wrong. If it is what you mean, that seems false to me , and undervalues what are in my view some of the best parts of that book.

Nate, could you explain a little further what you mean by the bolded bits above?

I'm inclined to the view that that is exactly what Capital does, ie. Marx outlines his axioms and assumptions and then uses those to explain the workings of capitalism (at least in a general sense, forgetting for the moment the complexities of reality).

If Marx's generalized depictions are incorrect, in a general way, to how capitalism works, then his analyses would be useless. However, if his generalized depiction simply miss exceptions that exist here and there (and in any generalized picture we should expect that)...

There's no need to quote chapter and verse from Capital in your reply, because I'm more interested why you think the way you do.

[Marx] starts in the abstract (the commodity, value etc) and then goes into the concrete (primitive accumulation and history) in order to better explain capitalism based on certain principles.

I'm inclined to regard kingzog's and my view as following the modern scientific method, but I'm keen to clarify, because perhaps either we're misunderstanding you or we're both incorrect.

kingzog, I think if you want Nate to engage with you you need to be a bit less condescending.

after being in and facilitating several Capital study groups.

He's not coming from a position of 'hey I think Marx is wrong'... He's coming from a position of 'having read capital a number of times, I have a problem with the relationship between the theoretical parts and the empirical parts. And they are reasonably clearly delineated. For example in Vol 1, Chapters 10, 14, 15, 26-33 are all empirical/historical whereas Chapters 1-6, 12, 16 etc have almost no empirical or historical information. And this poses some serious problems on how to interpret the historical specificty of Marx's theory of value. See for example Chapter 2 of Chris Arthur's book . blah blah blah' (Where blah blah blah substitutes for the arguments in the above blog).

In this context calling him confused about an issue that divides and confuses people who have spent their entire lives working on the 'history of thought/philosophy' specializing by looking at Marx, and telling him banalities like "Vol 3 is the book where everything previously written comes together" make you come across more than a bit of an arrogant.

Also, I'm once again in a reading group, reading Capital and my plan for this one is to take up Nate's challenge and read capital more as a work of economic history than how I've read it before i.e. as a work of critical theory.

Something I would also be interested in doing at some point is reading 'A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy' in a similar vein. In it he situates his theory of value more historically and I'd like to get a chance to go through that. Plus its not very long.

Nate, could you explain a little further what you mean by Nate

it sounds here like you're saying the more empirical and evidence-based parts of Capital are mostly just illustrations of the more abstract parts . (...) that seems false to me , and undervalues what are in my view some of the best parts of that book.

I don't think there's any textual evidence to support the view that the final section of Capital, on so-called primitive accumulation, is just a restatement of points made theoretically elsewhere in the book. I think that section does theoretical work. The chapters on the working day and on machinery do relate in important ways to the more abstract sections of Capital. But as I read it, for Marx the struggles over the length of the working day that he describes in chapter 10 are the pivot through which English capitalism was pushed from an arrangement of accumulations centered on absolute surplus value to one centered on relative surplus value. I think that makes a theoretical point something like the following. Part of the dynamism in the system is not narrowly economic, where capitalists acting based on narrowly economizing rationality figure out how to move capitalism forward. Rather, a key part of the development of capitalism is historical and political, driven by a process of conflict. I think the 20 pages or so in section 6 of Chapter 10 are particularly relevant today in a time of rising social movement response to capitalist crisis, as in that section Marx describes, in my reading, a process whereby workers' struggles plus visionary leadership by some state personnel, manage to make clear to some capitalists how to better act in line with their interests, then provide some force to help those capitalists push the capitalist class (or its leading fraction) into making changes that were good for capitalism as a whole and for manufacturers in particular. He also discusses some of the health effects of production on the English working class and how this became a matter of concern to the British government because of the military ramifications of English workers' health (smaller, weaker workers might be less effective in wars against the French, among other things.) Those dynamics are not summed up in the excellent theoretical descriptions in the book. Which is why the empirical portions are just as worth reading as are the more abstract parts, rather than just skipping over them or skimming them in order to get to the next theory passages.

Likewise in the sections on machinery Marx describes some of the changes in the make up of the industrial workforce wrought, in part, by introduction of machinery (a shift to more fixed-capital intensive arrangements) in terms of gender relations. (I think Marx is questionable on some of the particulars there - looking back from 2012, unsurprisingly, Marx is not quite the feminist I'd like him to have been.) Those sections too do a kind of work which is not reducible to mere illustrations of the more abstract and theoretical portions of the book.

Yeah I agree, I definitely feel confused as I read your comments. 8-)

consider what Marx talks about in Capital as a whole. (...) It really is a unitary body of work and to not include material or ideas from vol 3 is a real shame.

I'm not convinced that's true nor do I see the point of the claim. "A unitary body of work" is sort of in the eye of the beholder. For one thing, asI tried to suggest in the post, and comments I wrote to follow up, that Marx changes the operating assumptions in the book at a few points. He also changes the types of material he reads (from political economists who were primarily theorists without much empirical content to empirical work by factory inspectors and state commission, to which he attributed great scientific value in his correspondence with Engels, I can find the source on that if you want). So there are important differences within v1 of Capital alone.

For another, v1 is the only part of Capital that Marx finished for publication, unless you want to count the Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy and some of his more journalistic pieces. And after its initial publication in 1867 he substantially revised v1 of Capital for the French translation in the early 1870s, completely reworking the intro sections. (I can find the original starting sections if you like, there on libcom someplace.) And according to Engels, Marx wanted to further revise the text but wasn't able to for reasons of health. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/p5.htm So that unitary work changed a great deal over time as Marx wrote it and it never really reached a point where Marx felt it was fully finished.

If you want to take v3 as the best bit of Marx, that's fine. All of this subject to interpretation. But you're wrong on an important empirical particular when you say kingzog

Vol 3 is the book where everything previously written comes together.

While v3 was published and of course is numbered after v1 and v2, it wasn't written afterward. Here's Engels's in his preface to v2. "Book III (...) was written, at least the greater part of it, in 1864 and 1865. Only after this manuscript had been completed in its essential parts did Marx undertake the elaboration of Book I which was published in 1867. I am now getting this manuscript of Book III in shape for press. The following (...) in 1865 or 1867, is the first separate, but more or less fragmentary, elaboration of Book II as now arranged." http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1885-c2/ch00.htm#1885

So Marx didn't write them in the order of book I, book II, book III, and the Theories of Surplus Value, the order they were published in. He wrote a lot of bits following on from the Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy, wrote most of the Theories of Surplus Value, wrote book III, then wrote book I, then wrote some of book II in the early 1870s. In that period Marx also reworked parts of v1, and late in life wrote more of book II.

So none of that sounds like an essential whole to me, except two ways. One is to say "look, there are persistent themes." Sure. Most writers have those. Another is to hold Marx up as an unrealistic superhuman philosophico-critical genius who layed out a fully coherent body of thought systematically and flawlessly across a period of decades. That's a handy founding myth for erecting a tradition to stand upon, but it seems to me simply not to be upheld by the actual record that exists. Rather it seems to me that Marx was an ordinary human genius, a furious reviser and rethinker.

Finally, given that v1 is the work Marx finished and revised, I don't see that we should take unpublished work over published work as stating what Marx REALLY thought unless there's actual evidence that Marx preferred the unpublished work or unless the unpublished work was written after the published work. (And I suppose I should add the usual caveat that while I have personal interest in Marxology because I find Marx very fruitful to think with, I think our main criterion should be "is this reasonable?" rather than "did Marx say it?" I listed several bits in what I wrote that lays out what are, in my view, places where Marx says something along the lines of "here's how to read my book more reasonably - I'm giving you categories with which to think about capitalism, don't mistake those categories for the history of actually existing capitalism.")

if his generalized depiction simply miss exceptions that exist here and there (and in any generalized picture we should expect that)

No. It's not a matter of exceptions. It's a matter of variations. Marx's work offers a useful framework for conducting investigation into actually existing capitalism. It's incredibly powerful and hard to over-rate. But reading Capital doesn't tell you what is happening in the economy today. It tells you some good starting places for figuring out what's happening. That's not a matter of rare exceptions to otherwise true generalizations. (And if there are exceptions, the general framework has to be able to explain them. I think marxism can do so, but it can't do so without inquiry, just by reading and restating Marx's canonical writings.)
