---
title: "Genesis Zerowork 1"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/genesis-zerowork-1"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An account of the background to an formation of the collective who produced the Zerowork journal in 1975."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/genesis-zerowork-1)

An account of the background to an formation of the collective who produced the Zerowork journal in 1975.

Contents Introduction The Analysis Paths to Zerowork Theoretico-political Roots

Those who formed the initial collective that published the first issue of Zerowork were a diverse bunch with various intellectual and political backgrounds and, collectively, considerable international experience. George Caffentzis, William (Bill) Cleaver, Leoncio Schaedel and Peter Linebaugh were Americans living in the United States, but George had family in Greece, Leoncio had recently escaped Chile after the overthrow of Allende and Peter had studied in England. While Bill and Peter had both majored in history, during the crafting of Zerowork #1 Bill was working in the library of the New School for Social Research in New York City and active in local union politics, while Peter was teaching history at Franconia College and at New Hampshire State Prison. George had studied philosophy of science and was teaching at Brooklyn College of City University of New York. Leoncio was in the graduate program in political economy at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Paolo Carpignano, Mario Montano and Bruno Ramirez were Italians who had all studied in Italy before crossing the Atlantic. But while Paolo and Mario came and stayed in the US, Bruno moved on to Toronto, Ontario after completing both a BA and an MA in the US. Peter Taylor was a Canadian living in Toronto working — and not working — in the Post Office. Paolo and Mario had both studied sociology, and Mario was teaching it at Clark University. Bruno was working on his dissertation in history. The two corresponding editors, John Merrington and Ferruccio Gambino lived in Britain and Italy respectively. But John had studied in Italy, translated and circulated political materials from Italy in England and participated in study groups with Peter Linebaugh. Ferruccio was at the Department of Political Science at the University of Padua where Toni Negri was chairman, but his frequent travels in Europe and the United States not only kept everyone up-to-date on what was happening and being discussed elsewhere but wove a web of interpersonal relations vital to all involved. (For more detail on the intersecting trajectories of their lives, see the section below with individual biographical sketches.)

These folks came together in the midst of crises both local and international.

Within major Canadian and U.S. cities, such as Toronto, Montreal and New York City, successful and untamed struggles by both waged and unwaged workers had been undermining capitalist control for some years. Ever since public employees in Canada — spearheaded by Post Office workers — had won collective bargaining rights in 1967 and formed the Common Front in Quebec in 1972 — the ability of city, provincial and national governments to provide popular services with cheap labor had been undermined. In New York City street-level and welfare rights struggles had interacted with those of public employees to so undermine the “business climate” of the city as to provoke business flight and job losses in the private sector and fiscal crisis in city finances. By 1974-75 the banks were beginning to refuse to roll over the city’s debt while city government, with the help of union bureaucrats, were beginning to raid union pension funds — not only to cover city debts but to undermine public employee struggles. (1) These crises were forerunners of others to come — of which the automaker abandonment of Flint, portrayed in Michael Moore's 1989 film "Roger and Me", and the 2013 bankruptcy of Detroit are but two examples. (2)

At the international level, widespread worker struggles in the United States had undermined the ability of the Keynesian state to manage the wage/productivity deals that had been the basis of post-WWII accumulation and had provoked business efforts to compensate by raising prices — causing such an acceleration in inflation as to contribute to the disappearance of the U.S. trade surplus and to provoke President Nixon in 1971 to unhook the dollar from gold and abandon the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates. That ostensible “monetary crisis” was soon followed by a state-engineered food crisis in 1972 and the first “oil shock” of 1973-74 — initiated by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) but sanctioned by United States policy makers. (3)

In the midst of these crises, local, national and international, the members of the Zerowork collective put our heads together to construct an analysis of the situation — an analysis that would, hopefully, also reveal strategic implications for workers’ struggles. Two things had become obvious to all of us. First , these crises were not the usual “inevitable” crises envisioned by the Left as resulting from the internal laws of motion of capitalism, but were the products of, and responses to workers’ struggles. (4) Second , those struggles had achieved the power to throw capital into crisis — and provoke it to counterattack — through a dynamic interaction between the struggles of the unwaged and those of the waged. Indeed, by the time we came together, all of us in the Zerowork collective had seen beyond the classical Marxist definition of the working class as made up of waged workers to a broader view in which the unwaged — including housewives, students and peasants — were integral both to the expanded reproduction of capital and to the make-up of the working class.

These two shared insights had grown out of both experience and study. On the one hand, several of us had been involved in unwaged student struggles and in the Civil Rights movement that brought us together with waged workers; others had been involved in waged worker struggles but linked, organizationally, to those of the unwaged. Examples of the latter were collaborations between Canadian student activists and blue collar militants in both the national Post Office system and local automobile factories. On the other hand, the emergence of the women’s movement had not only brought to the fore the centrality of women’s work in the home (and student work in schools) in the production and reproduction of labor power, but produced new theoretical formulations that deepened Marx’s limited discussion of that work and its role in capitalist reproduction as a whole. At the same time, study of the origins of capitalist policies in rural areas of the Third World — from the Vietnam War and land reform to innovations in agricultural technology — revealed not only how capitalists understood peasants to be part of the class they were doing their best to put to work but how the struggles of those more-often-than-not unwaged peasants undermined the best laid capitalist plans and forced repeated shifts in counter-revolutionary strategies.

But having become convinced that the crises surrounding us had been brought on by workers’ struggles — both waged and unwaged — we still had to figure out what characteristics of those struggles had given workers the power to rupture capitalist accumulation? On the surface, the characteristics were as varied as the struggles themselves and seemed to have little in common — a situation that led capitalist policy makers — always keen to divide to conquer — to disparage them as distinct “special interest” politics and others, more sympathetic, to honor them as diverse “social movements.” Waged workers had been fighting for more collective bargaining rights (where they didn’t have them, e.g., farmworkers), against corrupt union bureaucrats (e.g., in the United Mine Workers and International Brotherhood of Teamsters) and, pretty much everywhere, for more money (higher wages and pensions), better working conditions and fewer working hours. Women had been fighting for personal, legal and economic equality. Students had been fighting for free speech, for changes in curriculum better suited to their desires, for ruptures in the links between universities and the war machine and for racial, ethnic and gender equality in access to higher education. Welfare rights militants — mainly women — had been fighting for more resources and fewer humiliating intrusions by state welfare agencies. Black and brown militants among the unemployed and partially employed had been fighting for civil rights, racial equality and against police repression. Prisoners (disproportionately black or brown) had been fighting against abuse, for greater legal rights and more freedom within their confinement to study and communicate. Peasants had been fighting for land, for autonomy and for liberation from foreign domination, whether colonial or neocolonial. All of these efforts contested one mechanism or another of capitalist domination, locally, nationally or internationally. But did all these diverse groups constitute sectors of the working class only in so far as they were all subjected to, and resisting, capitalist domination? Or, was it possible to identify enough interconnections to see beyond their differences to an interactive and collective efficacy? We argued that there were.

To summarize our arguments for the existence of such efficacy — as spelled out in the first issue of the journal — the historical dynamics of struggle that led to a many-sided rupture of capitalist command had two fundamental characteristics. First, there were not only myriad interconnections among the various struggles but those interconnections were pathways through which struggles circulated from sector to sector amplifying their collective effects. Sometimes that circulation was through confrontation; sometimes it was through collaboration; sometimes it was merely the result of some struggles inspiring others. Second, the manifold demands articulated within those diverse sectors, more often than not, involved or supported a common refusal of the fundamental mechanism of capitalist domination: the imposition of work.

The identification of the interconnections and directions through which struggles had circulated were central to the analysis laid out in Zerowork . We saw the struggles of waged workers, for example, to have been spurred by the entry into factories and offices of previously unwaged militants, whether from the streets (young black militants moving into Detroit and Flint auto factories) or from schools (ex-student activists moving into many domains of wage labor). We saw the struggles of men — ourselves included — to have been spurred by those of women, both in their intimate personal relationships and in wider social ones as women fought for equalities that challenged the hierarchies of capitalist patriarchy. Indeed, we recognized that the refusal of authority by children in schools was partly the consequence of the refusal of authority by mothers. The resistance of peasants (and other workers in Southeast Asia, and elsewhere) to US government counterinsurgency efforts, we argued, inspired draft resistance and anti-war activity. Just as the struggles of Mexican and Mexican-American farmworkers helped (along with exploitation and repression in the cities) inspire the formation of militant Chicano groups, so, we concluded, did the efforts of later force changes in the strategies of the former. Other examples can be found in the pages of the first issue of Zerowork.

To argue that the refusal of work lay at the heart of so many different kinds of struggle turned out to be one of the most controversial aspects of the analysis. It challenged the traditional socialist perspective that workers struggled against capitalist imposed work only in order to embrace post-capitalist work freed from exploitation and alienation. The inclusive understanding of the working class that included the unwaged meant that some domains that had hitherto been seen as refuges from capitalist imposed work, e.g., families and schools, were argued to also be terrains of the imposition and refusal of work. To the traditional Marxist recognition of worker struggles for shorter working days (and later weeks, years, and lives) detailed in volume one of Capital , those of us in the Zerowork collective saw other struggles by the waged, such as those for better working conditions, higher wages and pension funds as ones that, when successful, were used to reduce work time. Better working conditions meant less work worrying about and avoiding injury; higher wages financed strike funds and vacations; pensions financed earlier retirement. At the same time, we interpreted practices that were often dismissed by labor union bureaucrats as bespeaking laziness and irresponsibility, e.g., shirking on the job, faked sick leave and other forms of absenteeism, as informal acts of resistance to work — sometimes individual, sometimes collective and coordinated.

In a parallel fashion, once we recognized the activities of housewives and students as involving the work of producing and reproducing labor power, then a whole array of struggles clearly involved various forms of refusing that work. Thus the variety of struggles that defined the women’s movement — ranging from the refusal of family altogether (manifested in falling marriage rates) through the resistance of women to endless procreation and child-rearing (perceptible through falling birth rates and struggles for access to contraception and abortion), the fight for personal and legal equality (and thus less work for, and under the supervision of men, both in the home and outside it) and the assertion of the rights of women to form intimate bonds with other women rather than with men, to the demand for wages for housework from the state — we identified as undermining the capitalist ability to impose enough work within the nuclear family to guarantee the reproduction of a malleable labor force.

Similarly, we interpreted the myriad struggles of students against the imposition of discipline within classrooms, against the power of the state boards of education, school administrators and teachers to unilaterally determine the content of curriculum, against the reduction of learning to training for jobs, against the imposition of the same kinds of gender hierarchies being resisted by women outside of school, against the teaching of history, government and the social sciences that ignored struggles important to them (e.g., those of blacks, browns, women and even students), in short, against the subordination of their learning to educational institutions and programs shaped to justify and reproduce capitalism, as the refusal of the work of transforming themselves into manipulable and compliant members of the working class.

Instead of the post-capitalist vision imagined by socialists as consisting of a parasite-free, one-class society of workers in command of their tools, "zerowork", evoked for us a future in which the success of worker struggles was tending, among other things, to achieve such a dramatic reduction in work per se that it would become only one activity of self-realization among, and enriched by, other activities. The shared vision of those of us who crafted Zerowork was thus very much in the spirit of the famous passage in the German Ideology where Marx imagined a communist society “where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes, [where] society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criticize after dinner, just as I have a mind.” But unlike the usual socialist vision of a distant, future communist utopia, we also embraced another of Marx’s early insights, also enunciated in the German Ideology : “Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to which reality [will] have to adjust itself. We call communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things.” (5)

For all those who consciously suffer, and resent, lives burdened with too many hours and too much energy sacrificed to work necessary for survival, and for those who haven't completely internalized the very capitalist subordination of life to work and become one-dimensional workaholics, the term "zerowork" must be one to conjure with. But could there really be such a thing as zero work, or something close to it? Beyond utopian imaginings, could the real movement actually abolish the subordination of life to work? Are there paths down which we could actually create new kinds of social life in which work could be one of many, freely-chosen forms of self-realization instead of a means of domination? One response to these questions that quickly becomes obvious to anyone who takes them seriously is that technically such paths are quite feasible. A second response is that politically those paths can only be opened through struggle and the revolutionary abolition of capitalism. Allow me to explain the reasoning behind both of these answers.

With regard to technical possibilities, modern industrialized society has repeatedly demonstrated, in thousands of domains of work, that machines can be substituted for and reduce human labor. This has happened in so many industries — from agriculture through manufacturing to services and communication — that no room can be left for doubt that technological development can be, and has been organized, to reduce the amount of work required to produce this or that commodity. But to what degree can such reductions in particular kinds of work result in an overall reduction in the average amount of work required per individual? There are two ways of answering this question: historically and theoretically.

Historically the rise and spread of measuring, of the gathering of statistics on more and more aspects of modern life have revealed that within capitalism the substitution of machines for human labor has become progressively general. For millions, though not for all, there has indeed been a reduction in the amount of work required per individual. In the United States, for instance, between the mid-1880s and 1940 — a period of rapid technological innovation in industry — the average working week was reduced from 75-80 to 40 hours and from 6-7 days to five. The weekend, that revered two-day period in which millions of waged or salaried workers are freed from any obligation to show up at their jobs, was the result. In the post WWII period — as technological development continued, often facilitated by war-time innovations, a similar reduction occurred in terms of working years as annual vacations emerged, providing many workers with enough days freed from jobs to permit substantial non-work activities, such as travel and tourism. Although some anthropologists have compared such marginal achievements negatively to the vast amounts of free time enjoyed by some pre-industrial peoples, certainly the course of modern capitalist development has thoroughly demonstrated the technical feasibility of the progressive reduction of work. (6)

With regard to theory, the development of capitalism has included the recognition of the technical possibilities of steadily reducing work on the part of its critics but also of its apologists and strategists. Not surprisingly, writing in sympathy with workers whose lives had been rendered miserable through longer and longer hours of imposed work, the critics of capitalism, of its "satanic mills" and of its dank, polluted working class neighborhoods were the first to herald those possibilities. (7) William Godwin, in his An Inquiry Concerning Political Justice (1793) and Frederick Engels in his speeches in Elberfeld (1845) waxed eloquent about the possibilities of reducing the total amount of work by eliminating all of those jobs — both private and public — peculiar to the protection and promulgation of capitalism. (8) By 1867 Karl Marx was able to analyze theoretically, in his Capital , two phenomena relevant to the possibilities of reducing work. On the one hand, he highlighted the power of living social labor that was repeatedly imagining and inventing new machines and new ways of organizing production to make work more efficient. On the other hand, he showed how capitalists turned that imagination and inventiveness against workers through its relative surplus value strategy of substituting those machines for living workers. By raising labor productivity (i.e., output per hour), such substitution made it technically feasible to enjoy the fruits of such substitution in the form of less work. (9) But instead, capitalists were using those innovations to control workers and impose more work. Ironically, quite different theoretical innovations by supporters of capitalism could lead to the same conclusions about technical possibilities.

During the rise of capitalism, its theorists — mercantilists and classical political economists — were more preoccupied with justifying the imposition of work and figuring out how to impose more work on people who did not want their lives confined to endless toil, than with exploring the possibilities of reducing work. But, by the end of the 19th Century, the theoretical innovations of neoclassical, marginalist economists clearly revealed that technological development made possible more output with less work. At the time, economists such as Alfred Marshall, were mainly concerned with wielding their theory of marginal productivity to convince workers to restrict their demands for higher wages within the bounds of productivity increases. (10) Marshall examined the conditions under which marginal increases in wages might reduce profits and those under which they would not. The key was the relationship between marginal increases in wages and marginal increases in labor productivity or "efficiency". In Chapter 11 on wages in his The Economics of Industry (1879) we find:

A rise in the Time-wages of any trade tends to diminish profits. But if the wages that are paid for work vary according to its efficiency — if Task-wages are unaltered — the share of the produce of industry that is left for others [the capitalists] will be the same whether Time-wages are high or low. It is only where the rise in time wages is not accompanied by a corresponding increase in efficiency, and therefore Task-wages rise, that the change is injurious to capital."

Yet this same theory is equally applicable to the issue of work time. Let us imagine productivity — measured in terms of output per hour of labor — doubling through the introduction of machinery. Then obviously one has choices as to how to realize the fruits of that increase in productivity: double output with the same amount of work, the same output with half the work, or some intermediary combination of more output and less work. Clearly, any choice other than the one that maintains the existing hours of labor involves reducing work. Moreover, if any of those choices that reduce work are made over and over, year after year, then the amount of work will be steadily reduced. Indeed, the ever-diminishing amount of work will asymptotically approach zero.

Therefore, as long as increasing productivity can be achieved, zero work is a goal that can be approached ever more closely. The many decades in which technological innovation has involved rising productivity has been one source of the optimism associated with the modern idea of progress. That idea, for some, has included the continuing technical possibilities of reducing work. (11)

Turning from technical possibilities to political realities is necessarily sobering. Close examination of the historical path of rising productivity cited above reveals that only through sustained organizing and struggle have workers been able to realize the fruits of their innovations in the form of less work. At every step of the way, capitalists have opposed such reductions, often with violent repression. In Section 6 of Chapter 10 of Volume I of Capital , Marx described and analyzed the struggles of English workers to reduce working hours. Years later David Roediger and Philip Foner presented a parallel study of workers' struggles in the United States. (12) Only those struggles were able to wrest time away from work as labor's share of the benefits of its own creativity — to win the forty hour, five day week and the weekend. The same history has played out throughout the capitalist world. The better organized and motivated the workers, the more they have won. Workers in Western Europe, for example, have won greater reductions in work time than those in the U.S. American workers have, in turn, won more than many in other parts of the world.

The reasons workers have fought to free their lives from capitalist imposed work — alienation and exploitation — were also analyzed by Marx. At the same time, he also recognized how capitalists could concede some benefits to workers in exchange for their productivity raising innovations. But why have capitalist employers preferred, in general, to concede greater wages rather than less work? Why the bloody repression against battles for the 8-hour day in the late 19th and first half of the 20th Centuries? One answer emerges from the realization that the core of Marx's theory — his labor theory of value — is really a theory of the value of labor to capital as its most fundamental and thoroughgoing mechanism of social control . Capitalists don't just impose work to get rich by exploiting other people; capital as a whole can only survive by endlessly subordinating people's lives to work. Control-through-work includes not only that exercised directly over waged or salaried employees during formal "working hours" but also vast amounts of formally "free" or "leisure" time. For example, for years, during and after Marx's lifetime, workers fought to liberate their children from mines, mills and factories. As they achieved the ability to do just that, and demanded schools to prepare their children for better lives, capitalist social policy makers — backed by corporate or State funds — swooped in to structure public schooling to incarcerate, discipline and shape children into compliant future members of the labor force. Similarly, capital has intervened in every sphere of so-called leisure time — from the home to domain after domain of recreation — to convert people's activities into the unwaged work of producing and reproducing that ability and willingness to work for capital that Marx called "labor power." It has not always been successful, but its efforts have been quite thorough.

The implications of all this are at least three-fold. First, as a result of capital's attempts to turn all of life into work, the struggle for less work can be found throughout every dimension of capitalist society. Second, for those struggles to successfully open paths toward zero work requires not only the freeing of time from formal jobs, but also the defeat of attempts by capital to convert our gains (e.g., child labor laws) into subtle defeats (e.g., obligatory schooling as mere job training). Third, precisely because we must fight everywhere, what we really need is the revolutionary transcendence of capitalism.

One of the complaints leveled against Zerowork #1 when it was first published and circulated was that its mode of presentation — the simple exposition of an alternative analysis of the current crisis in terms of class struggle — failed to clearly identify its theoretical and political roots. (13) This was a complaint shared not only by those to whom the analysis laid out was entirely new, but also by those who were familiar with at least some elements of it and felt that origins deserved recognition. (14) Where did the core ideas come from? The answer to that question is neither singular nor simple, and that is, perhaps, one reason for the absence of any attempt to sketch those origins — a desire to avoid an overly academic exercise in intellectual history. To all appearances the members of the Zerowork collective hoped that the analysis in the journal was different and powerful enough to catch the imagination of others and lead to discussions in which its roots would be explored to whatever extent folks felt the need to explore them. This was a choice accepted by some but lamented or resented by others.

To some extent, of course, such exploration has occurred. Gradually, hitherto obscure bits and pieces have been unearthed and shared. (15) It is easier now to map the rhizosphere than it was when the first issue of Zerowork appeared. So, to give some idea of the roots that nourished the thinking and discussion within the collective, I will sketch some of those historical roots — they are multiple — focusing on those most related to the theoretical insights I have mentioned above and connections among them.

Personal note: because I was not involved in the Zerowork collective during the preparation of the first issue, my own understanding of this history began after it was published and required considerable research on both sides of the Atlantic to identify and sort out the various interwoven roots. (16) One thing that became clear to me was that the degree of familiarity with those roots within the Zerowork collective was very uneven. Some were known to all, others to a few, some remained unknown, moments of unfamiliar history.

Let me begin with the understanding that “crisis” in capitalism is first and foremost a crisis in class relations brought on not just by some internal laws of the mode of production but by workers’ struggles. That understanding has at least two identifiable roots.

One root can be found running through the history of both anarchist and Marxist theoretical reflection on the class struggle that has seen workers — quite independently of any official leadership, i.e., union or political party — as capable of autonomous collective action in their own interests, both against capitalist exploitation and for alternatives. Segments of that thread can be found in the writings of some in the anarcho-communist tradition, e.g., Peter Kropotkin or Emma Goldman; some can be found in the works of the Council Communists, e.g., Anton Pannekoek, Otto Rühle and later Paul Mattick and, especially relevant to the genesis of Zerowork , some can be found in the writings of Trotskyists. (17)

Neither of the first two traditions — anarchist and councilist — seems to have had much influence on the thinking of those in the Zerowork collective, either directly or indirectly. The limited influence of the anarcho-communist movement on those Marxists who did have more direct influence in the genesis of the analysis of crisis in Zerowork is the easiest to understand. The long-standing differences and antipathies between anarchists and Marxists — dating from the conflicts between Marx and Bakunin in the First International — has meant that few Marxists, including the original editors of Zerowork and those upon whose works they drew, made a close study of anarchist writings or were inspired by them. (18)

Second, the limited influence of the council communists is a little more difficult to understand. On the one hand, those with roots in orthodox Marxism-Leninism, including Trotskyists, tended to accept Lenin's critique of Council Communists as suffering from an "Infantile Disorder" and failed to engage their writings. This included some who would eventually break with Trotskyism and develop ideas that would mirror, in some ways, the writings of the Councilists. As has often been the case, a lot more energy was expended in sectarian infighting among Trotskyists than in the critique of those outside their circles — other than Stalinists, of course. With respect to the specific issue of the relationship between class struggle and crisis in capitalism, the tendency of Councilists to see working class autonomy only coming into play as the result of crises in capitalism, and to locate the sources of crisis in its internal laws of motion rather than in the struggles of workers, contrasted with the reverse emphasis of those who would have more influence. (19) The exception among the Councilists to this conception of the relation between crisis and class struggles seems to have been Anton Pannekoek — but even his work on this subject was largely ignored. (20)

Among those Trotskyists who largely ignored the Council Communists but who would become influential — directly and indirectly — in the genesis of Zerowork were those associated with the Johnson-Forest Tendency (JFT). Johnson and Forest were pseudonyms of C. L. R. James (1901-1989) and Raya Dunaveyskaya (1910-1987). (21) These two, and those clustered around them, repeatedly differed with both Trotsky and the leadership of various Trotskyist factions on key issues, especially the nature of contemporary capitalism (which for them included the USSR), the role of Black struggles, the role of the vanguard party and the relationship between working class struggle and capitalist crisis. Those differences were laid out in a series of essays and led first to their leaving the Socialist Workers' Party (SWP) along with Max Shachtman to form a separate "Worker's Party", then to a return to the SWP and finally to a terminal split with Trotskyism in 1951 to form their own group, the Correspondence Publishing Committee. Like the Council Communists the members of the Tendency recognized and valorized the autonomous power of workers to not only to initiate revolutionary uprisings, e.g., 1905 and 1917 in Russia, 1918 in Germany, but also to create their own organizations, e.g., factory committees and soviets in Russia and workers councils in post-WWI Germany. Later events in the 1950s, such as the formation of autonomous councils by Hungarian and Polish workers during the uprisings of 1956 were taken as more concrete evidence of such capacities. (22) However, the ideas of the JFT differed from that of the Council Communists in several ways.

Curious about the apparent failure of those in the JFT to engage with the Council Communists, I once asked Martin Glaberman about this. He recounted two reasons.

We never did deal with the Council Communists, but in informal discussions there were essentially two criticisms. Their view of state capitalism was basically an analysis of the Soviet Union, we saw ours as much broader, a view of a stage of capitalism. Secondly, we rejected their criticism of Leninism and their view of the period from 1917 to 1924. (23)

Although the JFT eventually broke with the Leninist concept of the vanguard party, they continued, for the most part to honor other aspects of his thinking. Beyond those two reasons, we might add two more reasons for their neglect of the Council Communists.

First, partly because of James’ experience in the Caribbean, his participation in the development of Pan-Africanism and his writings about Black struggles, there was more awareness, discussion and acceptance in Correspondence of autonomy of sectors within the working class. This was especially true with respect to autonomous struggles by Blacks both in the work place and in the larger society that they argued ought to be recognized as legitimate, be accepted and be valorized. (24) This emphasis on the autonomy of Black struggles within the working class — including how the development of the class as a whole could be driven by Black struggles against discrimination and racism — did not find a parallel in the work of the Council Communists.

Second, whereas when thinking and writing about crisis the Council Communists tended to remain stuck within the framework of debate over the “laws of motion”, those associated with the JFT and Correspondence, while taking a position in those debates, moved on to focus on how workers’ power could rupture capitalist development and precipitate crisis.

The JFT's position in the debates — enunciated as part of articulating their differences with Trotskyism — affirmed the centrality of Marx's analysis of "the tendency of the rate of profit to fall" in Volume III of Capital . This they counterposed to Stalinist, Trotskyist and mainstream economic efforts to shift attention away from production to problems of inadequate aggregate demand. (25) At the heart of their understanding and embrace of the theory of "the tendency of the rate of profit to fall" was the conviction that the core of capitalism was production and the struggle between workers and capital at the point of production. Moreover, they saw the key process driving the tendency of the rate of profit to fall — namely the rise in the technical and organic compositions of capital — as resulting from workers' struggles — rather than the more common view that source was competition among capitalists. This was their understanding of Marx's analysis of relative surplus value in Volume I of Capital — which, for them, grounded and informed their interpretation of the discussion in Volume III. The corollary of this interpretation of Marx's theory of crisis was their insistence that the only struggles with revolutionary potential were those taking place within production in industry. Although they saw things like increased wages and higher standards of living as victories won by the working class, they also saw them as concessions capital could make that left the social relations of exploitation and alienation in production unchanged.

All this, they argued, was characteristic of contemporary capitalism both in the West and in the Soviet Union — a capitalism they called "state capitalism". (26) State capitalism, they reasoned, was the appropriate label for the stage of capitalist development in which the state planning had become essential to capitalist strategies, regardless of whether the methods of planning were those of Soviet Five-year Plans or a combination of Keynesian and corporate planning. While such planning could help avoid problems of inadequate demand, they argued, it had two fundamental weaknesses. First, it was helpless against the consequences of the tendency to substitute machinery for labor — namely the undermining of the rate of profit. Second, while capital could plan, workers could undermine those plans. This emphasis on the ability of workers to undermine capitalist planning was based on studies of worker struggles against capitalist plans in American factories and worker and peasant struggles against Soviet state planning. (27) These arguments, and others, they laid out in a series of publications, the most comprehensive of which was State Capitalism and World Revolution (1950) crafted to differentiate their position as carefully as possible from others within the Trotskyist movement. (28) Once this differentiation was accomplished and they left the Trotskyist movement to form the Correspondence Publishing collective, they also largely disengaged from the debates among Marxist factions over crisis theory to focus on the phenomenon they had identified as the only source of real change: workers' struggles at the point of production.

Growing differences between James and Dunayevskaya led to a split in 1958, with Dunayevskaya and her followers leaving to found a separate group News & Letters. James and his supporters then changed the name of their group to Facing Reality. Given their common origins, there were many similarities in the theories and activities of these two groups as well as the differences that led to their split and those that developed afterwards. (29)

Because of the participation by most members of Correspondence in workers’ struggles, e.g., those of autoworkers in Detroit, they were well aware of how rank & file workers often fought not only their corporate bosses but union bureaucrats and party hacks all too ready to cut deals with management at their expense. Such analyses and the conclusions they drew about the autonomous power of workers and their ability to craft “the future in the present” were laid out in a series of publications over two decades. Probably the most widely circulated of these was The American Worker (1947) by Paul Romano (Paul Singer) and Ria Stone (Grace Lee, later Boggs) in which Singer first op. cit. provided a detailed description of life in an East Coast General Motors' plant and Lee then laid out a Marxist analysis of the implications of the life and struggles described by Singer for the "reconstruction of society". This early pamphlet was complemented by other essays by Marty Glaberman such as Punching Out (1952) and Union Committemen and Wildcat Strikes (1955) and by Matthew Ward's (Si Owens, later Charles Denby) Indignant Heart: A Black Workers' Journal, (1952), based on their experiences in Detroit auto plants. Essentially part of this tradition, although published after leaving the Correspondence Publishing Committee in 1962, was another black autoworker's autobiographical work: James Boggs’ (Grace Lee’s husband and ex-editor of Correspondence) The American Revolution: Pages from a Negro Worker's Notebook (1963). With the focus of so many of these writings on workers’ struggles in large industrial factories, they constituted an American version of what would later, in Italy, be called a “workerist” perspective. In a period in which many Leftists had written off the American working class as hopelessly bought off — the most recent incarnation of Lenin’s “labor aristocracy” — the revelations about shop floor struggles in these writings refocused many radicals’ attention and hopes on their revolutionary potential — to create crises for capital and open new possibilities for workers. (30)

The direct influence of this earlier work on Zerowork #1 can be found primarily in the article by Peter Linebaugh and Bruno Ramirez, “Crisis in the Auto Sector,” which immediately asserts that “the crisis reflects an impasse in the relations of power between capital and the working class, an impasse which in recent years has been made more visible by the ongoing upsurge of autoworkers’ struggles.” The article draws, in part, on research and analysis previously undertaken by members of the Canadian group the New Tendency (NT), several of whom were working and organizing in the auto plants of Windsor, Ontario. Bruno was a member of the NT and the article references material on auto workers’ struggles in the NT’s main publication The Newsletter , of April 1974. Glaberman’s writings, based as they were on his experience as an autoworker across the river in Detroit, were of particular interest to those Canadian militants and influenced Linebaugh and Ramirez’s analysis both directly and indirectly. The influence of this previous work can be seen primarily in the detailed examination of autonomous shop floor struggles often exploding in wildcat strikes against both management and union efforts to mediate/control/limit the conflicts.

Two further important influences on the thinking of those in Zerowork deserve mention — both the work of historians. The first was that of George P. Rawick whose work on slavery in the United States included something largely lacking from C. L. R. James' study of slavery and revolt in Haiti. Rawick was a comrade of those in the Johnson-Forest Tendency and many of those they influenced (see the brief biographical sketch of Ferruccio Gambino below). Rawick's work on slavery in the American South was based on the assembly of some twenty volumes of slave narratives. His overview volume to that series, From Sundown to Sunup: The Making of the Black Community (1973) drew on that mass of first-person accounts by slaves of their lives and struggles, in large part — as the title of the book suggests — during those hours out from under the direct supervision of their owners. (31) In a sense, Rawick's study, although an historical one, looking back to an earlier time, fulfilled Marx's objective with his workers' inquiry: to learn directly from workers about their struggles. Such a mass of documentation had not been available to James, but Rawick's work made it available and from it he drew his most important conclusion, namely, that there was far more day-to-day self-activity among slaves than had hitherto been recognized. In other words, he discovered a movement of self-determination among slaves — that built the underground railroad and sometimes exploded in violent revolts — that paralleled other examples of working class self-activity. In 1969 he had written a widely-read article about the self-activity of American waged workers in the 20the Century; in 1973 his book on slavery revealed some vital roots of that self-activity. (32)

The second influence by historians, and one that is cited by Rawick, was that of the bottom-up British Marxist historians, especially Edward P. Thompson and his The Making of the English Working Class (1963). In reconstructing the history of workers' struggles in England he sought "to rescue the poor stockinger, the Luddite cropper, the "obsolete" hand-loom weaver, the "utopian" artisan, and even the deluded follower of Joanna Southcott, from the enormous condescension of posterity." He did so by retrieving stories of those workers' past struggles from the infamous "dustbin of history" where most historians, including labor historians, had left them. His ability to see past historical accounts of official labor and party organizations to the self-activity of the workers themselves paralleled the perspective of the Johnson-Forest/Correspondence/Facing Reality folks who had gradually weaned themselves of the Leninist desire to organize workers and had begun to explore and reveal the struggles of workers directly.

Thompson's influence on Zerowork , however, came not only indirectly through George Rawick, and directly through several editors' familiarity with The Making of the English Working Class , but also through the work of one of those editors in particular: historian Peter Linebaugh who had been a student of Thompson in England. (See his biographical sketch below.) Not only had Linebaugh worked directly with Thompson, but he had also worked alongside other young historians who were building on previous bottom-up history in rewriting the story of the relationship between crime and the working class in the 18th Century. The first product of that collaboration was Albion's Fatal Tree (1975) — the "tree" being the hanging scaffold at Tyburn in London. (33) Eventually, Linebaugh's magisterial The London Hanged (1991) would reflect both his historical research and his involvement in Zerowork . (34)

Other roots of the understanding of how workers’ struggles were the source of crisis in capitalism, grew and proliferated partly as a result of the circulation of the above work to Western Europe where a parallel shift took place from the usual Left union and party politics to a focus on the situation, struggles and power of workers themselves.

In 1948, shortly after the Johnson-Forest Tendency's reentry into the Socialist Workers Party, Grace Lee went to Paris to attend that organization's Second World Congress. While in Paris, she met Pierre Chaulieu, party name of Cornelius Castoriadis (1922-1997), a Greek revolutionary who had fled to France after the war and one leader of another small dissident group — this time within the French Trotskyist Party — the Chaulieu-Montal Tendency. (35) Later she wrote of this encounter:

Castoriadis' described this encounter as an "intellectual love affair between Grace and me." She was, he claimed, "delirious" about a text he had written called "The Phenomenology of Proletarian Consciousness". The main point of agreement, he wrote, was recognition of "the self-activity of the working class." (37)

In a move that Johnson-Forest would adopt three years later, Castoriadis and Lefort broke away from the Fourth International and founded Socialisme ou Barbarie (SoB) as a completely independent organization. (38) Like the JFT, SoB sought new solutions to the problem of working class organization in the autonomous power of rank & file workers.

The meeting of minds between Lee and Castoriadis, and then the sharing and circulating of experience and ideas between the JFT and SoB more generally, led to the translation and serial publication of The American Worker in the first eight issues of Socialisme ou Barbarie: Organe de Critique et d’Orientation Révolutionaire (1949-1965). Introducing the text in the first issue Pierre Guillaume wrote:

Every worker, regardless of “his nationality” of exploitation, will find in [ The American Worker ] the image of his own existence as a proletarian. There are, in fact, deep and consistent characteristics of proletarian experience that know neither frontiers nor regimes. (39)

It also led to collaboration of Castoriadis with Grace Lee and C. L. R. James in the drafting of Facing Reality: The New Society . . . Where to look for it, How to bring it closer, A Statement for our time (1958). (40) One chapter, “New Society, New People,” constituted an almost lyrical ode to the reality of working class imagination and power to craft a new society out of the present. The essay sweeps across the world, from the developed First world to the underdeveloped Third, from the new attitudes and behaviors of shop stewards in England through the struggles of women in the United States to anticolonial struggles in Asia and Africa. Everywhere they claimed to see "new men, new types of human beings" throwing off the encumbering prejudices and destructive hierarchies of capitalism to develop new ways of being.

Alongside the serialized American Worker and articles critiquing various Trotskyist positions, Socialisme ou Barbarie published a whole series of reports on the situation and struggle of workers in French factories and drew conclusions about the dynamics of capitalist growth and crisis. With respect to the USSR, SoB shared the Johnson-Forest position that Stalinism had established a form of state capitalism, although they differed in particulars. (41) Articles on the situation and day-to-day struggles of workers included G. Vivier’s series “La vie en usine” (Factory Life) and Daniel Mothé’s frequent reports on autoworkers at Renault. (42)

But if SoB saw how workers’ struggles could rupture capital, they also recognized capital’s Post-WWII successes in co-opting such challenges to its authority. (43) In a 1961 essay in issue #32 of the journal, Castoriadis argued that post-war capitalist growth was based on the harnessing of workers’ wage struggles. “Capitalism”, he wrote, has learned how to channel “working-class pressure against the consequences of the spontaneous functioning of the economy into ensuring, via the State, economic and social control.” (44) Despite the links between Johnson-Forest and Socialisme ou Barbarie, the work of the later appears to have been largely unknown either to the Canadian militants who were drawing on the works of the former or to members of the Zerowork collective — at least in the period during the crafting of the first issue.

More familiar to at least some members of the Zerowork collective was similar work being done in Italy — inspired, in part, by the translation into Italian of The American Worker and of the writings of Daniel Mothé by Danilo Montaldi. (45) Within Italy, rank & file revolts multiplied in the period 1960-62 against not only the leadership of the relatively conservative Unione Italiana del Lavoro (UIL) but also against the politics and strategies of the Socialist Party of Italy (the PSI, Partito Socialista Italiano), the Communist Party of Italy (the PCI, Partito Comunista Italiano) and those of their affiliated unions — especially the Confederazione Generale Italiana del Lavoro (CGIL). The leadership of both parties and unions had essentially colluded with Italian capital’s post-WWII development plans. That collusion led growing numbers of working class militants and radical intellectuals to rethink their politics and their theory. (46) Inspired by the revolts, by discovery of the writings of workers in the United States and France, and by the rediscovery of the detailed questions in Marx’s A Workers’ Inquiry (1880), radical Italian sociologists such as Raniero Panzieri (1921-1964) and Romano Alquati (1935-2010) — trained, in part, by Montaldi — went into factories such as Olivetti and Fiat to talk with workers about their concrete job situations and their struggles, both day-to-day and periodic wildcat strikes. (47) Sociologists, yes, but sociologists of a new sort — conscious re-innovators of conricerca , or co-research, in which the “objectivity” of their investigations was co-produced by these outside researchers and the workers with whom they investigated the situation at hand. (48)

These investigations were carried on, at least at first, by some, in the hope of bringing new understanding and new politics to the unions and to the left parties. Panzieri, for example, still hoped to influence the PSI despite past differences with it. Over time, however, such hopes faded and even when this or that new concept, in one form or another, was assimilated by those faithful to those institutions, or when one of these innovators returned to the fold, the new concepts were sometimes wielded in support of the same old social democratic politics.

In the short term, however, their studies and theoretical reformulations led to the creation of a series of new concepts and new journals to disseminate and discuss them. At the heart of the new reformulations was the replacement of the traditional Marxist focus on capital and its “laws of motion” with an understanding of capital as a set of antagonistic social relations of class in which struggles, especially those of workers, drove the development of the whole. Moreover, the concept of the working class — informed by the extensive empirical research mentioned above — recognized how divisions in the class were not merely vehicles of capitalist control (pitting one group of workers against others in hierarchies of power). Those divisions were also repeatedly recomposed through historical cycles of workers’ struggles that changed the balance of power between the classes. Their analysis provided new theoretical foundations for the phenomenon those in Johnson-Forest/Facing Reality had postulated years earlier: that workers’ struggles repeatedly generated new organizational forms. These Italians extended their studies backward in time and across space, examining not merely the history of Italian workers’ struggles, but also those of American workers. They discovered how those cycles of struggle not only generated new organizational forms and recomposed the balance of class power but also led, inevitably, to changes in the character of working class interests and demands — changes that had both required and produced new organizational forms.

Bringing these insights to bear on the contemporary situation in Italy, they argued that the post-WWII wave of capitalist rebuilding, especially in the industrial belt of the Po Valley, was not only based on the pitting of large numbers of young workers from southern Italy against northern workers but had gestated a new “mass worker” akin to those organized by the Wobblies in the United States in the early 20th Century and to that working class formed in the Fordist mass-production factories of the 1920s and 1930s. In other words, the pattern of capitalist development that Antonio Gramsci (1891-1937) — patron saint of orthodox Italian communism — had identified as being a uniquely American phenomenon was being imported into Italy and was being used against Italian workers just as it had been used against American ones. (49) Only this time, a whole new set of Marxist concepts were emerging both from close study of worker struggles and from reinterpretations of Marx’s own works to understand the class dynamics of that development.

The first of the new journals to have a substantial impact was Quaderni Rossi (Red Notebooks) whose first issue in 1961 included a collection of documents on class struggles in FIAT by Alquati and a path-breaking theoretical piece by Panzieri. “The capitalist use of the machine” returned to Marx’s analysis of “machinery and modern industry” — Chapter 15 of Volume I of Capital — to refocus attention on how machinery was used by capitalists not just to raise productivity — part of the rationale of the left parties and their unions for collaborating with capitalist development — but also to undermine workers’ self-organization and power. That analysis explained both rank & file wildcats against the efforts of corporate bosses to introduce Fordist methods into the plants and their refusal to follow the dictates of union bureaucrats to cooperate with such changes. (50) This amounted to a renovated Marxist theory of technological change in class terms that identified opposed class interests and drew organizational conclusions. (51)

In issue after issue of Quaderni Rossi its pages were filled with both empirical work and theoretical innovations. Panzieri’s piece on the capitalist use of the machine was soon followed in 1962 by Mario Tronti’s “Factory and Society” that argued how “the pressure of labor-power is capable of forcing capital to modify its own internal composition, intervening within capital as essential component of capitalist development” — workers’ struggles drive capitalist development. Moreover, that pressure forces capital to colonize “the whole of society” such that it comes to exist “as a function of the factory and the factory extends its exclusive domination over the whole of society.” (52) This analysis Tronti deepened in the third issue of Quaderni Rossi with an essay on “Capitalist Planning” that argued that business was driven to ever more comprehensive planning by the resistance and struggles of workers. (53) The old orthodox dichotomy of capitalist “despotism” on the shop floor and capitalist “anarchy” in the social division of labor is dissolved as planning is extended ever more widely and capitalist society becomes a gigantic “social factory.” (54) In the process, all traditional distinctions between economic and political power disappear. That article was complemented by Panzieri’s "Surplus Value and Planning: Notes on the Reading of Capital ," in the fourth issue of Quaderni Rossi . (55) In short, these Italian Marxists, drawing on their studies of actual workers’ struggles and detailed re-readings of Marx in the light of those studies, were elaborating what amounted to a revolutionary theoretical grounding of workers’ autonomy. Tronti would go on, in essays such as “The Strategy of Refusal” and “Struggle Against Labor”, to identify and articulate how the dynamics of workers’ struggles had led beyond the traditional skilled workers’ demand to take control of their tools to contemporary demands of unskilled “mass workers” on assembly lines for less work, period, i.e., not just the refusal of capitalist imposed work but of work as the only focus and preoccupation of life. This historical shift was also documented by Sergio Bologna in his “Class Composition and the Theory of the Workers’ Party in the German Workers’ Council Movement” (1967) and much later in "The Theory and History of the Mass Worker in Italy", (1987). (56) Quaderni Rossi (1961-66) was soon accompanied or followed by other organizational efforts and other publications, e.g., Quaderni Piacentini (1962-1984), Classe Operaia (1963-67), La Classe (1967-68), Potere Operaio (1969-74), and Lotta Continua (1969-76).

What of all this was known to the editors of Zerowork ? It varied. This whole new wave of innovative Italian Marxist thinking was well known to the Italian members of the Zerowork collective: Paolo Carpignano, Mario Montano and Bruno Ramirez and corresponding editor Ferruccio Gambino. The ideas were also well known to the other corresponding editor John Merrington who had studied in Italy and, along with Ed Emery, translated many texts. Emery (later Red Notes) and Jim Kaplan (later Radical America ) went to Italy after the explosive Hot Autumn of 1969 to talk to people and gather documents; one result was the pamphlet Italy: New Tactics and Organization produced by Emery in 1971 — whose circulation nourished the development of Big Flame and the struggles by autoworkers in England. (57) Those translations were discussed in multiple study groups, including one organized by Merrington and Emery that included, among others, future Zerowork editor Peter Linebaugh.

On the other side of the Atlantic, in the years before the Zerowork collective was formed, both Mario Montano and Bruno Ramirez contributed translations of key workerist texts to the American journals Telos and Radical America . Other translations were done by individuals interested or involved in this or that wing of the evolving struggles in Italy. Most translations were either from Lotta Continua (LC) or Potere Operaio (PO). Among them were “Italy 1969-1970 Wave of Struggles” by Ferruccio Gambino, “Organizing for Workers’ Power” by Andriano Sofri and “Class Struggle and European Unity” by Guido Viale. (58) Several of these translations were compiled and published in Radical America in 1971 and 1973. (59) Some were published as pamphlets and circulated by various groups in the U.S. and Canada. These translations — along with word-of-mouth accounts by their Italian comrades — provided the primary window into Italian developments for those in the Zerowork collective who did not read the language. All these materials can be considered more or less significant inputs into the thinking of everyone in the collective. (More detail is included in the biographical sketches of the various individuals.)

Alongside these primary roots of the thinking that went into the composition of Zerowork — some quite old — I want to pay special attention to the emergence from relative obscurity of what might be called an aerial root — because once above ground, it flourished in the light of day and then became a major component of the root architecture of the first issue of Zerowork — the analysis of class struggle in the various domains of the production and reproduction of labor power. Awareness of such struggles was never completely absent among the groups already mentioned but in terms of the amount of attention devoted to these domains, for a long time they were given relatively short shrift. This seems to have been the case across all those groups sketched above.

In the period from the 1940s through the 1960s, from the earliest work of the Johnson-Forest Tendency through Correspondence and Facing Reality to Dunayevskaya’s group News & Letters, I have only been able to find bits and pieces of writings dealing directly with domains such as the home and housework or school and schoolwork. In Europe the more or less parallel workerist focus on waged factory labor — running from Socialism ou Barbarie through Quaderni Rossi to Potere Operaio — also involved a relative neglect of the labor of reproduction — until a women’s backlash began to properly readdress the situation in the early 1970s.

With respect to housework — traditionally understood as a domain of women's work — relatively little was written or published about the struggles of women qua unwaged houseworkers. In The Invading Socialist Society (1947) that C. L. R. James called "the fundamental document of the Johnson-Forest Tendency" — where it set out its differences with both Trotsky and other Trotskyists — there is nothing at all on women or the work of reproducing labor power. In The American Worker (1947) Singer only devoted a couple of pages to the ways in which workers' harsh life in the factory haunted their life at home and only a couple of lines to how it added to the housework burdens of their spouses. In Lee's analysis, while she does not "deny the importance of women struggling as women for emancipation", she focused on "worker's activity in production", neglected labor in the home and argued that the emancipation of women could only come through a "revolution in the mode of production." (60) In State Capitalism and World Revolution (1950), the chapter devoted to their analysis of the class struggle, including "the mode of labor in the United States" included, once again, nothing on women or the work of reproducing labor power, despite the authors' recognition of the welfare state as a new component of state capitalist social planning.

The same year, however, an unpublished, book-length manuscript by C. L. R. James, Notes on American Civilization , included one section on “Negroes, women and the Intellectuals” — apparently an after-thought, to “fill up certain gaps” and for the sake of rendering a “total impression of society.” In the dozen or so pages devoted to women, James sketched the growing frustration of middle-class women with the disparity between the idea of equality and the concrete inequalities of their daily lives. (61) The result: the spreading refusal by women of all those constraints upon their self-development as human beings — including their traditional subordination to men and child rearing within families. He pointed to the refusal of increasing numbers of young women to marry and to rising divorce rates among those who do. Although such constraints and struggles were only “highly publicized” among middle-class women, he argued, they “apply with ten-fold force to the vast majority of working women or wives in the United States.”

Also that year, Raya Dunayevskaya contributed a short piece on "The Miners' Wives" to the SWP's newspaper The Militant highlighting the active roles of women during a coal miners' strike in West Virginia. However, the focus of that article was on the women's support for the men's strike. The only reference to housework was an account of a threat by the women to make their men "build fires, cook their own food, wash their own clothes, clean the house and hire baby sitters" if they returned to work without a contract. (62)

Two years later, in 1952, James encouraged Selma Weinstein (né Deitch, later James) — a single mother — and Filomena Daddario to write about the situation and struggles of women. The result was an essay titled A Woman’s Place — published with the pseudonyms "Mrs. Marie Brant" (James) and "Mrs. Ellen Santori" (Daddario) — that described the work of both stay-at-home housewives and those who also worked for a wage, the problems faced by women in both situations and their struggles to deal with them. A “woman’s place,” they argued, was less and less in the home and increasingly wherever women had the power to go. (63) The essay was published first in Correspondence and then as a pamphlet in 1953. The next year, in 1954, Weinstein wrote a regular column about issues specific to women for each issue of Correspondence’s biweekly. (64)

Early in 1953 Raya Dunayevskaya drafted an essay — that remained unpublished — that included a few pages on women's struggles. In some ways, the analysis paralleled James' in his earlier unpublished manuscript, even using some of the same language. The major difference was the inclusion in her essay of a discussion of how the continuation of wartime roles of women in the Workers' Party was challenged by men after the war and how those in the Johnson-Forest Tendency defended those roles, but were still limited in their ability to move beyond old political categories and frames of references. Similar problems surfaced, she wrote, when the JFT rejoined the SWP and discovered that while many women "occupied the same subordinate position that women did in bourgeois society — they worked to support their men" — even the women in "leadership" positions shared the male leaders' sense of superiority over rank and file members. The very limited analysis in both unpublished manuscripts and published articles indicates how little attention, study and thought they were devoting to struggles against the work of reproducing labor power — especially if these few scattered pages are juxtaposed to, say, Simon de Beauvoir's 800 page, two volume Le Deuxième Sexe ( The Second Sex ) published in 1949. (65) According to the transcript of a talk given by Dunayevskaya in 1974, she was not only familiar with the book in the 1950s but discussed her reading of it with Black factory women — especially her conclusion that de Beauvoir thought that men must free women. (66) Yet despite her critique I have found no evidence of any effort in those years to produce a parallel study analyzing women's work in the sphere of reproduction or to demonstrate the autonomous struggles of women against it. (67)

In 1958, Facing Reality did include a few paragraphs on women and their struggles for real equality — beyond whatever formal equalities, e.g., the vote, they had won up to that point. After noting "the handicaps of child-bearing and child-rearing in a competitive society", the existence of a "colossal struggle for the establishment of truly human relations between men and women", and rising divorce rates among "the professional classes", the authors argued that "the real battle for new relations between the sexes is being fought above all in the American working class". There, after the experience of waged labor during WWII, women "have no intention of once more becoming an adjunct to the male wage earner." They conclude:

In the age-long struggles of human beings to remold their world nearer to their heart's desire, rarely have such heroic efforts, such courage, such resource, such ingenuity been shown as in these efforts of American working women to live a complete life, a life corresponding to the technical achievements and social relations of their highly-developed society. As long as official society lasts, they cannot win a complete victory, but positions have been gained and if some have been lost, many have been held. This, one of the greatest social struggles of our time, goes unrecorded! (68)

Unfortunately, from all evidence, little more about those struggles was either studied or recorded by the members of Facing Reality over the next decade. (69)

A special issue of Radical America on women, published in 1970, signaled the rising power of a new generation of feminists to change the agenda of “the movement” more generally. As the decade unfolded not only would some women draw on, and criticize, the traditions I have described but they would deepen their analysis and organize themselves in new autonomous ways. Of all the moments of the “Women’s Liberation Movement” of those years, the one that would have the most direct influence on Zerowork was, without a doubt, the Wages for Housework analysis and campaign. Whereas the writings in the 1950s about women’s struggles were primarily descriptive — with the underlying Marxism mostly implicit — in the 1970s the writings of women associated with Wages for Housework explicitly drew on Marxian categories while substantially elaborating their analysis of the work of reproducing labor power and valorizing contemporary struggles against it.

The seminal piece of writing that largely framed the thinking and strategies of the Wages for Housework Campaign was Mariarosa Dalla Costa’s essay “Women and the Subversion of the Community” originally written as a discussion piece for a gathering of Italian feminists in Padova in 1971. That essay, as Dalla Costa would explain later, was an attempt to synthesize the ideas and experience that had been developing among women — herself included — who had been engaged in the workerist movement in Italy, especially Potere Operaio — a network of groups that had already argued for wages for unwaged subjects like students. (70) A year later the Wages for Housework Campaign was launched, again in Padova, along with the formation of the International Feminist Collective. Dalla Costa’s 1971 essay and the 1952 essay on “A Woman’s Place” were then combined — the former translated into English and the latter into Italian — and published, first in Italy (Padova: Marsilio Editori) in March 1972 as Potere femminile e sovversione sociale and then in England (Bristol: Falling Wall Press) in October 1972 as The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community .

The basic arguments — that the essential labor of producing and reproducing human life as labor power for capital is not only vast but largely hidden because it has been unwaged and unrecognized, that without the labor of reproduction there can be no labor of production and that the former labor should, instead, be revealed, recognized and waged — was soon elaborated by many authors in many languages as part of the International Wages for Housework Campaign. Among those elaborations, the ones familiar to most of the men in the Zerowork collective — besides The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community — included the following: Selma James, “Women, the Unions and Work,” (1972), Selma James, “Sex, Race and Working Class Power,” (1974), Silvia Federici, Wages Against Housework (1975), Nicole Cox and Silvia Federici, Counterplanning from the Kitchen: Wages for Housework, A Perspective on Capital and the Left , (1975) and the collection Wendy Edmond & Suzie Fleming (eds) All Work and No Pay: Women, Housework & the Wages Due , (1975). (71)

There were, however, certain theoretical formulations in these Wages for Housework publications — beginning with Mariarosa’s seminal essay — that did not sit well with some otherwise sympathetic comrades. I will illustrate with just one example, important given the political genealogy sketched above, that reveals how the thinking of those in this history was evolving. When Selma James sent a copy of Mariarosa’s essay to Marty Glaberman in 1972, he responded with a detailed critique of what he felt were the essay’s main shortcomings: the relationship between unpaid domestic labor and surplus value and, closely related, the definition of the working class or proletariat. (72)

With respect to what he saw as the first shortcoming, Glaberman objected to the assertion that “domestic work not only produces use values but has an essential function in the production of surplus value”. “Unpaid labor,” he countered, “creates neither value nor surplus value.” Marx’s “definition of value, exchange-value, etc”, he went on, “leaves no room for unpaid labor.” His objection foreshadowed that of many others as the Wages for Housework movement set off a widespread debate among Marxists and feminists about how to analyze domestic labor. How James responded to his critique, I don’t know, but clearly Glaberman’s objection lay in his interpretation of Dalla Costa’s argument that domestic work “has an essential function in the production of surplus value.” He — and many who came after him — read those words as meaning the same thing as Marx’s frequent statement that commodity-producing labor “creates” value and surplus value. (73) Neither his objection, nor the theoretical issue he raised was directly addressed in Zerowork — where Dalla Costa’s work was used as one fundamental building block of the overall analysis.

What he saw as the second shortcoming — a much too broad definition of working class — was closely related to the first. If, according to him, the working class, or proletariat, must be defined narrowly as including only those waged employees of capital producing commodities for sale (and surplus value or profit) then clearly all sorts of other people — including women in the home — should not be thought of as being part of the working class even if and when their struggles against capital “have independent validity” and even “contribute to the struggle for socialism, directly or indirectly.” Glaberman’s position here is rooted in both his theoretical understanding of Marx and in the long-fought politics of the Johnson-Forest/Facing Reality tradition of recognizing and valorizing the autonomous struggles of blacks, women, students, etc. To reinterpret these “other” struggles as being working class would, he feared, result in abandoning all of the important distinctions he and his comrades had fought to establish. Whether he ever confronted the new concepts of class composition and political recomposition that were designed specifically to capture and appreciate precisely those differences, and the interactions among them within the working class, I don’t know. (74) At any rate, the broader definition of the working class was basic to the analysis in Zerowork .
