---
title: "Socialist Case Ins"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/socialist-case-ins"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Many calls in the US to &quot;abolish ICE&quot;, including from a recently elected socialist, are actually calls to return to the notorious immigration police of the last century."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/socialist-case-ins)

Many calls in the US to "abolish ICE", including from a recently elected socialist, are actually calls to return to the notorious immigration police of the last century.

For several months, immigration policy in the US has erupted into a full blown crisis. Images of children in cages, even children from Central America, have disturbed the consciences of millions of Americans. The crisis is so bad that even right-wing politicians like Senator Ted Cruz and Speaker of the House of Representatives Paul Ryan have expressed dismay over the current policy of separating immigrant children from their parents. The current situation cannot hold, but not because caging children is anathema to US politics. In fact there is a long tradition of caging children in the US and separating them from their parents, from the enslavement of Africans (whose family members were often sold and never heard from again) to the genocide of Native Americans, whose children were shipped off to boarding schools through the Twentieth Century. Continuing to today, migrant children from Central America were encaged under the Obama administration, and juvenile detention centers continue to encage mostly Black and Latino children. The most notorious recent example is that of Kalief Browder, a 16-year-old who was detained on New York’s Riker’s Island for three years after being accused of stealing a backpack, later committing suicide after his release. The Kalief Browder’s that still sit in cages throughout the US will see no relief from whatever reforms come to deal with the current immigration crisis. And the reforms are likely to come. The legitimacy of the US’s racist border policy depends on a change to this disastrously cruel policy. It will likely be changed in order to ensure that Mexican and Central American and other immigrants can continue to be policed and exploited and terrorized, just perhaps with a bit less visible cruelty toward the children. “Abolish” ICE The rallying cry that has arisen, with a surprisingly radical tone, is to “Abolish ICE,” that is, to put an end to Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the federal immigration police force. New York Senator Kirsten Gillibrand–who is likely to be a contender in the 2020 presidential election– has called for an end to ICE . Cynthia Nixon, the Sex And The City actress running for Governor of New York, has called ICE a “terrorist organization.” Some ICE agents have even called for the agency’s dissolution . The last example should clarify what is really going on here. ICE agents–much less Kirsten Gillibrand–do not want to transform US immigration policy. On the contrary, these ICE agents see the soiled name of ICE as an obstacle to enforcing current immigration policy. This is why such a rallying cry has taken off across the mainstream, and not because any of these people really want to abolish anything. What may be surprising is the case of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. Seemingly out of nowhere, Ocasio-Cortez defeated incumbent Joe Crowley for his seat in Congress representing parts of the Bronx and Queens in late June. Crowley was an entrenched, mainstream Democrat and a likely successor to Nancy Pelosi as the leader of the Democratic Party caucus in the House of Representatives. Ocasio-Cortez, on the other hand, is a 28-year-old member of the Democratic Socialists of America winning her first election. Alongside her Bernie Sanders-style campaigning over working-class issues, Ocasio-Cortez has taken up the call to “Abolish ICE,” which has probably encouraged and even pressured others to do the same. Incredibly, however, her call is hardly different from the likes of Gillibrand. Rather than transform US immigration policy, Ocasio-Cortez wants to replace ICE with its predecessor, Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), or something similar to it. In a series of tweets from a month before the election–though completely unnoticed by those on the Left falling over themselves at “the birth of a new socialist movement”–Ocasio-Cortez noted:

About 10 years ago I worked in Ted Kennedy’s foreign affairs/immigration constituent office. I REGULARLY fielded calls from panicked mothers who came home to missing family members. ICE was created in 2003 along w/ the Patriot Act. It was a weapon waiting for a tyrant. . . . In fact, the folks who panic about the idea of #abolishICE seem to forget that we had a system before it: the INS. The INS forwarded crimes to the Department of Justice. That is exactly how it should be done. . . If a person commits a crime, they should go through due process as outlined in our Constitution. Period. That’s how it was until 2003. ICE changed all of that, and created an extrajudicial black-box system that has deported >10k US citizens(!) Here’s what must be done: We must #abolishICE. It’s very structure is about as undemocratic and authoritarian as it gets in the US. We have to replace ICE with an updated INS-like structure that handles crime through the same court system we’ve had for well over 100 years.

This is shocking stuff coming from an avowed “socialist.” One wonders if she has any idea that “panicked mothers who came home to missing family members” lived the same experience under the INS. One also wonders if she is aware of such “undemocratic and authoritarian” institutions such as the FBI, the law enforcement agency in the Department of Justice. These comments on Twitter are not just a fluke, they are her official immigration policy. In an interview with National Public Radio shortly after the election, Ocasio-Cortez reiterated these same points:

Interviewer: [Y]ou’re still going to have immigration officers, right? You’re still going to have customs officers, if you got your way. I mean, there’s going to be border enforcement. It’d just be under a different name. Ocasio-Cortez: Well, I think it’s a different name and a different approach, you know? Before ICE, we had Immigration and Naturalization Services, but it wasn’t until about 1999 that we chose to criminalize immigration at all. And then once ICE was established, we really kind of militarized that enforcement to a degree that was previously unseen in the United States.
