---
title: "Social Struggles China Joao Bernardo"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/social-struggles-china-joao-bernardo"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Phil Meyler from the Portuguese &quot;Lutas Sociais na China&quot;, published by Contra a Corrente, Lisbon, 1976. Text taken from the now defunct Revolt Against Plenty website, where it was also titled &quot;China 2&quot;."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/social-struggles-china-joao-bernardo)

Translated by Phil Meyler from the Portuguese "Lutas Sociais na China", published by Contra a Corrente, Lisbon, 1976. Text taken from the now defunct Revolt Against Plenty website, where it was also titled "China 2".

To the memory of Liu Chieh, Chu Ching-fang, Wang Li, Sidney Rittenberg and Yao Teng-shan who were in the forefront of the proletarian revolts during the 'cultural revolution', sharing in the illusions and greatness of that first great working class uprising against state-capitalism and who were reported to have been executed at the end of 1968 or early 1969.

I was somewhat hesitant when it was proposed to bring out this pamphlet in English. It is a hastily written polemical text in which no detailed economic and social analysis of Chinese state-capitalism is attempted. This is something which urgently needs to be done from a revolutionary Marxist perspective. A succinct and necessarily simplified explanation for a problem of such dimensions, in which much has still to be studied, runs obvious risks. It could be confused with those hurried generalisations and unprofound 'inspirations' which are the usual make-up of a certain far left literature. Much of this literature deals with China in two simple strokes. First, the authors establish a forced and unfounded parallel between the Chinese and Russian revolutionary processes, inventing Chinese Kerensky's and Russian Shanghai Communes (in I927), a Hundred Flowers Movement in Russia and a NEP in China. Secondly, the workers' struggles are not measured in the institutions in which they took place (in the real process) but on the basis of a few ambiguous slogans with entirely different meanings for the proletariat and the state-capitalists. In this way our revolutionary authors deny any revolutionary and spontaneous content to the tremendous mass struggles which shook Maoist China. As I see it, and for reasons which I hope are explained, however succinctly, in this pamphlet, such theses are worse than unfounded; they are utterly void.

This poverty stricken ideology reflects the social base of a part of the far-left groups, generally made up of frustrated students led by would-be technocrats. These leaders and militants project onto the working class the same contempt and superiority which they themselves are obliged to suffer from the truly dominant strata of society. The ideological nature of the explanations stems from this. The ruling class, to which they belong like contemptuous offspring, occupies the entire landscape; but since they are hated they take on a demonic function. Those in favour of the ruling class present it as the exclusive agent of all history - as a history of wonders. This section of the left-wing critics also present it as the exclusive agent of all history - but as a history of Horrors. In both cases the independent role of the proletariat is the same; nil. In this pamphlet, I have tried not to fall into this vicious circle and to show how the working class exercised an autonomous and revolutionary role in the struggles, which generally were unable to surpass certain ruling class factions. For revolutionaries, it is above all, these demonstrations of autonomy which should interest us most, since only through them will we be able to understand future conditions for a radical anti-capitalist struggle and a complete proletarian autonomy.

In the Portuguese context, for which it was written, this pamphlet came out of the need to criticise a different form of confusing proletarian struggle with the manoeuvres of the ruling bureaucracy. During the first half of 1976, when Teng Hsiao-ping tried to rise from being a factional ruling-class leader to being its supreme leader, thus paving the way for the rise of Hua Kuo-feng, a large number of Portuguese Maoists – as indeed Maoists all over the west - became euphoric, insisting that this meant the real victory of Mao, of Ms Chiang Ching and her followers. They pointed out that the proletarian rebels (news of whom was enthusiastically given) was support for the Maoist faction. They concluded that China was still Red and that the Maoist phoenix was rising over the ashes of the Centrists. Many journalists, perhaps because of a lack of other information, reproduced a more sober version for the bourgeois press. The Maoists tried to justify their revolutionary fantasies in this confusion. This pamphlet arose out of this situation. It wanted to show that Teng Hsiao-ping was not representative of the Centrists but belonged to a different faction; that it had been the Centrists and not the Maoists who had ousted Teng; that the Maoists had been 'dead' politically, ever since the end of the 'cultural revolution' and that the Centrists were only awaiting the death of Mao - and that the Centrists were only awaiting the death of Mao – and that perhaps, they would not even have waited, if that Great Helmsman had shown himself to possess a Long Long Life, in order to complete their final putsch. Above all it wanted to show that the more recent proletarian revolts were autonomous and didn't support any ruling-class faction and that the proletariat remained indifferent to these power struggles.

Mao died some months after the appearance of this pamphlet and, at least up to the present, all its forecasts are being confirmed. The 'Gang of Four' fell, without any workers' revolt trying to sustain it. And if their triumphant enemies today attribute responsibility for the proletarian revolts, before and after the fall of the Maoists, to the Shanghai Group, this should not fool us. In ruling class quarrels it is usually the losing faction which gets blamed for essentially spontaneous workers' struggles. The history of Stalinism has so many examples of this that it would be impossible for us to list all of the variations on this theme. Although those fooled by it for the first time might be excused, it is inexcusable when history is repeated. This pamphlet gives sufficient reasons for the isolation of the Maoists from the working class in the period after the 'cultural revolution'. And should these be insufficient then surely the speed with which the disciples of Ms Chiang Ching were dismissed or imprisoned, and their inability to launch any popular movement to support them, is supplementary proof that the present proletarian revolts are directed against the entire system and not merely against one of the ruling class factions. Thus, I continue to maintain that, after the 'cultural revolution', proletarian struggles sprang up spontaneously and were completely separate from the internal affairs of the state apparatus.

Regarding these intra-ruling class questions, it is worthwhile noting that the predictions made in the pamphlet have been generally, confirmed.

Despite this, the dust has not yet settled enough to give a definite opinion. The final crackdown of what remains of the Maoist tendency will tend to throw the power of the Centrists off-balance. It was exactly this unbalance which allowed the untiring Teng and his group to have another go at taking supreme power, an ambition which, up to the present, has been frustrated because the other tendencies have organised against it, leaving the Centrists to maintain the balance of power. The most important aspect of the struggle, irrespective of whatever happens to Teng or Hua or any of the other mandarins and marshals, is that it has broken the hold of the existing tendencies and allowed a new organisation of tendencies and a new balance of power. It means a reorganisation of the now mature (in other words, the beginning of the senile) phase of Chinese state-capitalism. I think the pamphlet has dealt with the economic reasons which determine this mature phase - although, as was pointed out, non-systematically and only in certain aspects.

This doesn't purport to be a detailed study, one which would give the text a long-term validity. Since it resulted from a polemical necessity my only aim was to understand a particular moment of class struggle in China. But an interested reader could use the method described here for an analysis of China in the years to come. Perhaps this is the only interest which the text has: a proposal for a model of how Marxist methodology could be applied to a state-capitalist society.

The Portuguese edition carried an appendix which is omitted in both the Spanish and the present English edition. In this appendix I was trying (how many, before me, have tried?) to open up a polemic with certain Maoists especially those who, in the Portuguese political spectrum, were more to the left. Obviously I did not succeed. Since these questions would be of little interest for an English or American public, the appendix has been omitted without anyone losing anything by it.

It goes without saying that certain passages would have been written differently today. One is perhaps more important than the others. It seems to me now, that the elimination of Lin Piao and his followers didn't simply correspond to a struggle of the rest of the factions of the dominant class against the Maoists, but also implied a split within the Maoist faction, in which the part led by Ms Chiang Ching supported Chou En-lai against Lin Piao. Lin was in favour of an accelerated militarization programme which would allow China to oppose Russia and the U.S. simultaneously. Such a programme implied certain economic changes and social tensions which would have broken the bonds between the Maoists and the working class (those defined in the pamphlet) and risked the very stability of the ruling class. This serious split within the Maoist camp shows the point to which it had weakened and lost all political initiative. But I doubt if this correction alters the general conclusions which were reached.

Many, disillusioned with what is happening in the USSR latch onto the myth of a Red China and a President (or Comrade? or Comrade President?) Mao, helmsman of proletarian struggles. Anxiously they tell themselves and others something to the effect that "if China is not communist then there are no communist countries and this implies that communism is a utopia and slavery eternal".

For myself and for many other comrades, denying that a communist government exists anywhere in the world means simply that, for us, communism and State power (particularly the economic power of the State) are totally antagonistic.

Communism is by no means an empty illusion. Daily, throughout the world, the proletariat creates egalitarian and communist social relations in its struggles when these are direct, autonomous and led, not by trade unions or political parties, but by the proletariat itself. But global capitalist market pressures prevent these new social relations from becoming dominant in any isolated country. All production poses the problem of finding outlets and it is impossible for any isolated company or country to develop and consolidate communist social relations given the integration and domination of the world capitalist market. The failure, so far, to develop a truly international revolutionary process has also meant the inability to transform the social relations established by the proletariat into communist relations of production. Nevertheless in vast sections of the globe proletarian struggles increasingly present themselves independently of the bureaucratic institutions, unions or factions of the state apparatus and thus create and develop new social relations which can last over a period; indeed, as long as the autonomy of the struggle lasts. Here is the proof that communism is not a baseless utopia. These proletarian social relations established in struggle prefigure tomorrow's world. It is here and not in the state apparatus and its appendices that the proletariat should place its hope. Here too, its strength should be concentrated. The strength of the workers' movement is measured by the workers' movement itself. We have no need to accept the blinkers of crude bureaucratic illusions.

I don't believe it possible to call a social system socialist or communist where it is not the workers themselves who control the economy, where wage-labour persists, where gratuitous labour is generalised, where capitalist technology reigns supreme, where repression of the autonomous workers' movement is a daily occurrence and where capitalist relations of production remain basically unchanged.

The counter-revolutionary foreign policy and alliances with the most backward and conservative forces have become the most widely publicised aspects of the Chinese regime because it is precisely this aspect which is of most interest to other capitalist countries, and most preoccupies their newspapers. But no 'foreign policy' can be separated from 'internal policy'. The present alliance of the Chinese ruling class with the internally repressive and externally aggressive capitalisms of the US and EEC countries corresponds to that stage of development of capitalist relations in China in which state-capitalism is expanding beyond the orbit of national frontiers, transforming itself into an imperialist power and entering into conflict with its closest enemy, Russian imperialism. The foreign policy pursued by the Chinese state-capitalists arises as a direct result of the reproduction of capitalist social relations within China. Thus, it can only be understood by analysing 'internal policy'.

It is not my intention in the brief space of this essay to analyse the principle economic aspects of Chinese state-capitalism or to trace the history of the great social conflicts which brought it about. This theme is dealt with in two or three well known books 1 . I shall limit myself to reviewing some of its more salient features.

Until the complete take-over by the Chinese Communist Party in 1949 China was, almost completely non-industrialised (with the exception of certain enclaves under direct foreign influence). Essentially an agricultural economy the country was dominated by production relations which were very different from those which had made European history. 2 This meant that the necessary capital for a sweeping and accelerated development of Chinese capitalist industry was non-existent. A country in such a situation, attempting capitalist development, has two general options.

(a) It can appeal for large scale investment of foreign capital, the state apparatus then using part of the subsequent profits to develop certain sectors of the national industry.

(b) It can expropriate the capitalists and big land-owners and with capital thus centralised, reinforced by an over-exploitation of the workers, it is able to develop capitalist industry and at the same time carry out the land reforms necessary for capitalist development.

Brazil today is an example of the first model while China is an example of the second. Clearly these models are not something which the ruling class can choose. They are imposed on them historically. These models don't ideally exist before they are applied in practise - on the contrary they materialise from the attempts to synthesise in theory the existing practical problems.

There is a fundamental common denominator between these two alternatives although the dynamic of each is different. What essentially they have in common is the reinforcement of the state apparatus. In the second mode the need for this state reinforcement is obvious since what is at stake is the expropriation of private capitalists and big land-owners and thus the transformation of private property into state-property. But in the first model, even though state ownership is reinforced, the fact that private property (and an active political role for private capitalists) survives tends to blur this reinforcement for the superficial observer. Investment of foreign capital on a large scale in a country where the state apparatus is politically and economically weak can only lead to total domination by a small number of multi-national monopolies who essentially use the country as a source for raw materials, thus stifling capitalist development as well as the development and expansion of the indigenous capitalist class. A country which relies on foreign investments can only divert a part of the profits of such investments to stimulate other sectors of industry by developing a strong state economy. This necessity to reinforce the state apparatus leads to a growing militarization of the political and economic fields, clearly evident in the countries attempting this model (from Iran to Brazil, amongst the right, not forgetting the left-wing Peru). Both models necessitate the reinforcement of the state apparatus and the development of state capitalism. But there are differences and these condition not only the economic trajectories as also the class struggles which develop.

Private capitalists continue to play an important and active role in the first model. This, in general, forces them to accept certain parliamentary forms or at least a facade of liberalism, which, at first sight appears to contradict the ruling dictatorial system. Secondly, since economic development depends on profits channelled by the state from foreign dominated economic sectors; this means that development is highly uneven. Inequality can thus be greater than the general rule under capitalism since no development takes place in those branches which go against the interests of foreign capital. The country thus finds itself dependent on fluctuations in the world market. Unable to influence it, it is forced to suffer its effects; and its industry therefore remains completely subordinated to technological developments within the imperial metropoles.

Thirdly, since a large number of workers are hired by companies directly dominated by foreign capital their control is not only critical in the sphere of production but also in the subordinate sphere of consumption. This leads to distortions in the standard of living and consumer habits and results in increased inflation. Lastly, together with all these factors, the systematic entry of purely speculative capital, loans designed to subsidise the bureaucratic government apparatus but playing no part in production, increases inflation in these countries to a level higher than the world average. In general these fluctuations in inflation are felt much more brutally and have important repercussions on the whole process of industrialisation.

The second model generally characterises economic development in countries where, for various historical reasons attempts of the ruling class to initiate capitalist development coincide with the needs to engage in armed struggle against imperialist countries. A total or partial blockade is established and this makes it difficult, at least in the short run, to appeal for large scale foreign investments. At the same time, the armed struggle waged in a bureaucratic manner, develops a state-apparatus which is highly centralised and militarised. Such conditions, reinforced by the objective class interests of the state managers makes it necessary to take the type of measures implied by the second model.

The second model of development corresponds to the Chinese case, amongst others, and has the following more salient features.

Firstly, the private capitalists accept their own expropriation since without it there cannot be a sufficiently rapid concentration and development of capital. They accept their own expropriation - and this is fundamental for them – in so far as they maintain a leading position in the control of the economy. If, for some reason, there already exists a bureaucratic faction strong and large enough to oppose their integration into the state economic apparatus then it means that a profound social struggle occurs within the managerial and state-capitalist class. Usually this results in the extermination of the ex-private capitalists since the objective pressures of the concentration of capital oppose any other solution.

Secondly, the transformation of private property into state property, together with the needs of accelerated industrialisation, require that land reforms be carried out. While the small and medium sized holdings can have more or less weight depending on the political and economic circumstances, the larger estates are dissolved and statified and the estate owners, as a rule are both destroyed politically and physically eliminated. This is usually limited to an idle parasitic class and does not extend to the agricultural engineer who can easily be transformed into managers and state-capitalists. Agrarian reform is an indispensable basis for accelerated industrial development because it increases industrial productivity. It decreases food imports and allows more capital intensive industrial development. This increased productivity in, turn permits a decrease in the importation of industrial raw materials. It 'frees' the work force so that they can now labour in the industrial centres without having to live under the sub-nutritional conditions characteristic of the old regime, conditions which had made them less productive than is now deemed necessary. It also transforms agrarian holdings into markets for industrial products such as tractors, chemical fertilizers etc. It increases the standard of living for the rural population and thereby the internal consumer market as a whole.

Thirdly it gives a lift-off to capitalism simply through the concentration of national capital without, in the initial phase, relying on assistance from foreign capital. It necessitates a super-exploitation of the proletariat which in turn causes:

(i) The militarisation of labour, with the military bosses having direct control over the factories and union apparatus, applying military discipline to labour relations.

(ii) The use of gratuitous labour (unpaid work by soldiers, prisoners, agricultural wage earners and even by industrial workers) who, outside working hours cultivate a few vegetables in the small state-distributed plots, to complement their diet and compensate for their meagre wages.

(iii) An increase in the number of hours worked and of the intensity of work (the mythological 'heroes of labour' etc).

(iv) Alongside the militarisation of labour there is the increase in the repressive forces, be they police, Party, ideological, all involving productivity and designed to reinforce exploitation.

(v) For wages to remain at a minimum workers must ignore the greater part of consumer goods and not 'feel their need', thus reducing the demand for higher wages. In this way, while contact with the remainder of the capitalist world is restricted in the sphere of production, it becomes completely shut off from the penetration of modern consumer goods.

Finally, while this development ensures a greater internal equilibrium (within capitalist limits), it also permits (capitalist integration and the world market permitting) a greater technological independence in relation to advanced capitalist powers. This capitalist expansion acquires a sufficiently solid base so that, when the national limits of production are reached, it is able to transform itself economically into a particularly 'aggressive' imperialist power – something which need not always be expressed in military terms.

Such factors contribute to explaining the isolation of these countries. But really, this isolation is only apparent since a network of contacts is established between these countries and the centres of world capitalism. These include the importation of the means of production the export of commodities, especially raw materials. As soon as the economic blockade brought about by the armed struggle is lifted, this also includes the negotiation of loans. The penetration of foreign capital in this model is by no means nil. But it differs fundamentally from the other type of development. In general, investment by foreign capital is not direct but rather mediated through relations established between States. This development of State-to- State economic relations, a consequence of state-capitalist development in these developing countries, has very important repercussions on the investing countries. It reinforces the economic role of the state and contributes to important structural changes. Thus isolation is only apparent. This illusion of 'isolation' originates from the fact that dealings within the capitalist world market don't occur in their usual form - i.e. from capitalist to capitalist. Nor do they occur as in the first model of development; i.e. between capitalist and state. It is not really isolation that is in question at all, but merely the predominance of typical state-capitalist economic relations in the present stage of capitalist integration; i.e. State-to-State relations.

This all applies to China which, as we pointed out, is a typical example of the second type of development. However, in the Chinese case there is a specific aspect which is of tremendous importance. The limited capitalist development in China, before 1949, resulted in a lack of technological managers i.e. those managers whose task it is to understand and control the technical aspects of production and bridge the gap which in capitalist society exists between the producers and the means of production.

Before1949, managers in China were mainly administrators and bureaucrats, either in the official civil-service, or in the state apparatus organised by the Communist Party in those areas under its control. The result was that when, in 1956, the state took over almost all of the existing industrial capital, the dispossessed private capitalists remained in positions of technological control and were transformed into managers and state-capitalists. The needs of accelerated capitalist expansion in a country the size of China, with its lack of industry, allowed the integration of yesterdays private capitalists into the state apparatus. Moreover, it did so without developing friction and hostility on the part of the already previously formed state-capitalists; i.e. those formed in the central state apparatus between 1949 and 1956 or in the Communist Party controlled areas before 1949. The extent of the tasks which the managers had to carry out and the absence of a prior technocracy allowed this originally hostile group to become a part of the new ruling class.

This forms the objective basis for one of the most important differences between the development of state capitalism in the USSR and in China.

When, with the defeat and recuperation of the proletarian revolution in I9I7-I8, Russia systematically developed towards state capitalism, the extensive rural sector of the economy was still semi-feudal while the industrial sector was one of the most developed in the world. Russia, at this time, possessed one of the highest levels of capitalist concentration of industry, evidenced for example, in the fact that the number of wage labourers per factory was, on average, higher than that of the great capitalist powers. Production in certain basic industries, like steel, was one of the highest in the world. As a result, a class of technocrats already existed in the Russia of I9I7-I8. This resulted in two important differences with what was later to happen in China:

(a) The number of technocrats was large and they were well-trained. They were immediately able to take on the tasks of economic planning.

(b) The intellectuals (essentially the managers who had the knowledge to develop the productive forces) trained before I9I7, and therefore outside the Leninist party, were far more numerous than those inside the Party. Thus certain intra-managerial struggles took on the appearance of a conflict between intellectuals and the Party; something which has repercussions even today, as anyone who reads a newspaper knows.

In China, on the contrary, the intellectuals - or what interests us here, the managers - were integrated into the Party. They were either trained in the Communist Party controlled areas before I949 or later in the Central state apparatus. Or else, they were managers who had previously been private capitalists but who, in order to be included in the new ruling class; had to show their political and ideological loyalty - and what better way was there than joining the party. In this way, in China, all intra-managerial struggles meant struggles within the Party. This was eventually to provide them with more headaches than their Russian counter-parts.

The restrictions placed on the technocratic cadres during the first years of Communist Party hegemony throughout China in no way put an end to this struggle within the ruling class. This historical situation has had, even until today, very important effects on the character of Chinese proletarian struggle against the state capitalist system in expansion. Even though all of the old private capitalists had been integrated, the number of managers and state-capitalists has been, until very recently, insufficient for the total planning of the economy. And without total planning a fully state-capitalist system cannot survive. It would have had to resort to manipulating market prices in order to achieve economic equilibrium, thereby implying a complete economic and political restructuring. Under Chinese conditions, this would have brought down the regime and meant a return to the previous situation (although the previous regime had given ample proof that it was unable to develop capitalism or even maintain the then existing economic situation.) They seemed to be trapped in a vicious circle: the interests of the regime as well as the objective needs of capitalism in China obliged a state capitalist system with a totally planned economy. But because of the historical weakness of Chinese capitalism, the class of managers which existed was too small to take charge of this process of planning.

The novelty of Maoism, with its particular conceptions of the state, the Party and the mass movement, consists precisely in the resolution of these problems. This is its historical role.

Quite recently I read a letter which criticised a series of articles on recent events in China. As it is hard to anything more succinct on the subject I'll quote most of the letter 3 .

"The author of these articles points out the difference which for him exists between a Maoist and being pro-China. Tired of the disconcerting twists in Chinese politics he opts for the comfortable position of being a Maoist without being pro-Chinese and is thus subject to such dilemmas as was Lin Piao a Maoist or a revisionist traitor who wanted to restore capitalism ? Is Teng Hsiao-ping a Maoist or Idem? And Chou En-Lai. Is Hua Kuo-feng a true Maoist or a disguised capitalist? Because there is only one Maoist; Mao-Tse-Tung (and even here)... For the author Maoism is a product of one enlightened brain and not the ideological expression of a real process which is unfolding in China (my italics). It is a process of capital accumulation in an under-developed country marked by continuous struggles between rival factions of the ruling group (Party/state). As such it has nothing whatever to do with the end of capitalism or commodity production, of wage labour. It has nothing to do either with the construction of a society in which the free development of one is the condition for the free development of all...."

Here the author of the letter goes much further than a mere reference to the Chinese situation. He points to what is, perhaps, one of the most important possibilities of developing revolutionary theory: to undertake a Marxist analysis of the so-called Marxist currents, or more concisely, to apply Marxism to itself, in a Marxist way. Our Marxist state-capitalists reserve the critical and dialectical method for an analysis of private property and degenerate into some of the crudest forms of idealism when they begin to discuss the 'socialism' of fully integrated state-capitalist systems.

What, in a nutshell, Maoism is all about - and this is what makes it original is the organisation of a system where it is the workers themselves who are given the task of putting the entire economic plan into effect, as well as making suggestions and studies in each production unit prior to elaboration of the plan. The managers and state-capitalists, however, maintain control over all central aspects of its elaboration and execution. This is the economic function of the famous Maoist system. It urges initiative at the grass roots level while, at the same time, preventing the unification of these initiatives. For Maoism, the proletariat should be allowed a certain level of activity - but only to the extent to which the state-capitalists need to make up for their own deficiencies.

The extent of these initiatives is limited, in the first instance, to the place of production, which are unable to unite with other localised initiatives and thus unable to develop into an autonomous movement. Secondly; the purpose of these limited initiatives is to reinforce state-capitalism. Moreover it is a form of unpaid labour; the proletariat is not paid to carry out managerial work and the exploited gratuitously undertake the tasks necessary for their own exploitation. Here is the real meaning of the 'mass-line' of Maoism, as well as the secret concerning the difference between the Stalinist and Maoist models of planning. This difference cannot be explained in terms of leaders. It is not, as the idealist missionaries of Maoism would have it, the result of ideological differences which have real effects but the result of real differences which have ideological effects. The peculiarity of Maoism in relation to the Stalinist model of state-capitalism is explained by the history of capitalism in both countries and by the type of development which these state-capitalisms are forced to follow today. Here I merely mean to introduce the question in a general way, since an exhaustive study is not my intention.

The peculiarities of the economic and social situation which Maoism reflects and leads has had important repercussions on the working class struggles in China, particularly in their large and apparently sudden outbursts as well as in the way they were recuperated. But these always formed part of the struggle against Maoism, or at worst, despite Maoism, and not because of it.

After 1949, the social struggles in China have been orientated by the following general axis and their multiple combinations:

a) The weakness of the managerial apparatus and its recourse to partial proletarian initiatives meant that the Chinese apparatus of ideological containment and repression was less monolithic than, for example, in Stalinist and post-Stalinist Russia, N. Korea, Cambodia, or many other countries under the American sphere of influence. Thus under these circumstances, whenever a minor crisis appeared in the apparatus of central control, there was always possibility that these partial though controlled initiatives might tend to become unified and transformed into a truly autonomous movement, into a struggle against the State and state-capitalism.

b) The Chinese state-capitalists found it necessary to appeal to the proletariat in the elaboration and practical execution of fragmentary aspects of central planning, extending the scope whereby proletarian elements could be converted into new managers. This constantly fed the ruling class with new blood, a considerable factor in the strengthening of this class 4 . In general, when the proletariat is forced to carry out managerial work gratuitously, a minority transform themselves into effective managers even though they formally maintain a proletarian appearance, especially as regards lifestyles.

c) The fact that these new managers are permanently incorporated into the ruling class, or putting it another way, that a high level of state-capitalist social mobility exists, increases the tensions within the state-capitalist class. The former private capitalists, now state-capitalists, have a relatively long tradition of being the dominant class. They are culturally very different from the popular layers, with a strongly defined elitist exclusivity. Hostile towards these new managers they oppose this social mobility as long as objective conditions allow them to do so. In this they have the support of the majority of state-capitalists who were trained inside the state-apparatus in those regions occupied by the Communist Party before I949. A minority faction, however, supports this infusion of new blood to the ruling class, but only because it is here that its own political force lies. The differences, it seems to me, depend on the kinds of positions occupied within the state-apparatus.

When analysing concrete examples, social struggles in China can only be understood if, in addition to the economic situation, we take into account these three axes and their possible inter-relationship.

Any analysis of the Chinese economy is, however, very difficult. Complete statistics for the overall economy are not available. They remain the secret of the state-capitalists - or more especially of its elite - and are not divulged to ordinary mortals, whether workers in China or in any other country, so that they could be informed about such apparently simple things as the evolution of production over the years, or consumer or wage indices, prices etc.

In 197I, for the first time since 1960, certain statistics were published. But they were partial and insufficient for an analysis of purely economic aspects or specific relations of production. In I975, the Chou En-lai Report to the 4th Popular Assembly (the equivalent of a parliament, given that China maintains the constitutional fiction of the existence of various parties and a Legislative Assembly) gave some more data on the evolution of production. But the report remained absolutely silent on the problems of distribution and consumption. Under such circumstances it is impossible to make any statistical analysis of the conjectural effects of the economic situation on the class struggle. 5

I'd be very pleased if our Maoist groups could explain how exactly a workers' democracy can function without the workers having the least chance of understanding the economic base of the society they live in. Of course it's not something they could explain to others, since its one of the things they can't even explain to themselves.

In reality the lack of complete published statistics is the condition whereby the proletarian managerial initiatives remain limited to each production unit. They can thus never question central planning, nor intervene in it. Anyone who has attempted to study the Chinese situation knows of this insuperable difficulty - and which the limited size and ambitions of this text cannot overcome. This allows certain idealistic or voluntarist tones to be imposed on the analysis. Social conflicts become isolated from the basic economic transformations and appear as mere attempts at self-justification, rather than being related to the evolution and problems of production or the entire economic base in general.

In the next part of this text I shall attempt to deduce the general economic and political lines of development in China but, it must be remembered, within the limits of the incomplete statistics available. The readers are thus forewarned, but let them also remember that they should keep this in mind when reading other analyses of the Chinese situation published over the last ten to fifteen years.

It is well worth emphasising one important social aspect which conditions each of the general axes outlined above. As state-capitalism evolved and the new managers were able to consolidate their positions, the lack of managers was being progressively overcome. In this sense the ideology known as Maoism , which sought to overcome the objective limitations of state-capitalism in the given economic and social conditions by resorting to fragmentary and localised proletarian initiatives, meets the beginning of its own end. Having (in the space of one generation and throughout the whole country) managed to train a layer of managers which are now capable of totally controlling the economy without the need to resort to fragmentary proletarian initiatives, Maoism is extinguished by achieving its historical goal. The death pangs of Maoism have agitated China for the past decade. They simultaneously reflect the end of the internal expansion and consolidation of state-capitalism and the beginning of its life as an already established social and economic system. With the 'cultural revolution' Maoism unleashed its final episode. But the physical annihilation of the revolutionary proletariat by Maoism, towards the end of the 'cultural revolution', demonstrated more than anything that the forms of social development which China had followed until then had lost their historical importance and necessity, and that Maoism as such was finished. In the years 1967-69 millions of Chinese revolutionaries saw Maoism as the executioner of the revolution. At the same time, the state-capitalists who had abandoned Maoism in order to let it struggle against the masses knew full well that the hour of Maoism was over and that it was now its own executioner.

Let's examine more closely how this process unfolded. This will help us understand the present situation which to a certain extent is the retarded development of the contradictions which existed at that time.

Initially the 'cultural revolution' appeared to be no different from other previous social upheavals which, as I mentioned above, never went beyond the limits of the state-capitalist class.

The Maoists, i.e. those sections of the state-capitalist class who found their social support and historical raison d'etre in promoting individual workers into new managers, along with these managers, periodically promoted large 'cultural' campaigns 6 aimed at levelling out the behavioural differences between the elite and the masses. This process sought to accomplish two objectives. On the one band, it played down the differences between the ruling class and the exploited, making it more difficult for the latter to consciously understand the class divide. It sought to impose the same style of dress on both exploiters and exploited - the famous Mao suits – and stepped up campaigns "to eat with the masses" and "live with the masses" which, are today part of Maoist political folklore. On the other hand, these campaigns were designed to serve the specific interests of the Maoist faction, used partly to eliminate other factions (with such arguments as that they lived scandalous lives, or were a source of revolt for the working masses). These campaigns were obviously conducted against the old ruling class as well as those who had held high office for some time and bad taken on the spirit and behaviour patterns of an elite.

These periodic 'cultural' movements played an important part in the struggle of these socially mobile managers and Maoist state-capitalists against the already consolidated, self-sufficient faction of the managerial and bureaucratic apparatus. The new managers, using these movements, sought to get rid of the restraints which hampered their promotional possibilities within the ruling class. Here was the new blood of state-capitalism rushing pitilessly through the already somewhat sclerotic arteries of the system.

However, unlike other similar movements, the 'cultural revolution', begun in I966, led to an enormous autonomous revolt by the proletarian masses - which up to the present day constitutes the greatest experience of revolt in a fully integrated state-capitalist system.

This happened because the 'cultural revolution' had come at a time when the internal evolution of Maoism had reached saturation point while, at the same time, the economic situation was such as to incite an upsurge of proletarian revolt.

The so-called "Great Leap Forward" had accomplished a tremendous accumulation of capital through the super-exploitation and defeat of the proletariat – in this case, with respect to their wage demands. It meant considerable deterioration of the workers' situation, especially their working conditions, the pace of work etc.

Proletarian revolt by the time of the 'cultural revolution' was then set to explode because of the following factors:

-The discontent felt when the workers demands made at the time of the "Great Leap Forward" were not met by the regime;

-The inability of the Maoists to maintain hegemony. They were being outflanked by the faction more linked to centralised management and to the old ruling class. This faction we can call 'traditionalist', and was led at this time by Liu Shao-ch'i and Teng Hsiao-ping;

This inability was a result of the fact that the state-capitalist class itself had sufficiently developed to be able to monopolize all managerial skills and powers. This implied the end of social mobility and appeals to localised proletarian initiatives.

(a) Conflicts within the ruling class were exacerbated and became more difficult to resolve. The usual process of social mobility which had always granted Maoism a quick victory was now bankrupt.

(b) The workers' movement (with all the structural reasons for revolt – the exploitation of surplus value) was restless because standards of living had fallen drastically. Reacting to this crisis which was partially paralysing the centre of power, the workers' movement unleashed a wave of revolt which went way beyond the usual isolated and partial struggles and grew into a national movement.

(c) It was no longer possible for the Maoists to curtail revolt by promoting proletarian activists into new managers. For the first time they were unable to recuperate the movement. They were forced to rely on massive use of troops to repress tens of millions of proletarians, killing thousands not to mention those who were executed later.

Within this framework of the evolution of the general situation, the proletarian revolts during the 'cultural revolution' took place. It brought with it tremendous hope as well as a dramatic defeat.

Perhaps it's difficult for the generation of revolutionaries which grew up in Portugal after 1968, to imagine the meaning of these revolts which took place during the 'cultural revolution'. We lived in a world where the, then triumphant anti-colonial struggles were laying the foundations for the most repressive and bureaucratic regimes; in which mythical hopes in a somewhat libertarian and poetically heterodox Cuba bad been dissipated by Castroist state-capitalism; where the upsurge of armed struggle in Latin America, which for years had fostered some hope, had shown itself to be mere will o' the wisp rather than a tremendous conflagration; in which the proletariat in the Eastern bloc apparently and passively had accepted super-exploitation and the debasement of their cultures; where we saw a Europe in which wildcat strikes were rare occurrences and the onslaught of generalised struggle something confined to the memory of other days. Living in a Portugal in which Salazarism had seemed to retain the upper hand after the 1958-61 crises and which, in spite of the colonial wars, had found a new breathing space with the 'liberalisation' which Marcelo Caetano (PM of Portugal 1968-74) was to introduce 7 , it would be difficult for this new generation to evaluate the new hopes, the spirit and the lessons which the sight of hundreds of millions of proletarians in struggle had brought with them. The defeat was hard.

The proletarian movement was defeated by two main factors. One of them was social, the Army, the other socio-ideological, Maoist mythology.

The reasons why the 'cultural revolution' didn't touch the Army are complex and I don't intend to list them all. I shall confine myself to two aspects. The first is of a particular nature, limited to China. The second is of a more general character which, it seems to me, explain the cohesion of the Army at a time when all other state institutions, including the Party, seemed to be falling apart or actually fell apart.
