---
title: "European Wide General Strike November 14 How Real How Relevant"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/european-wide-general-strike-november-14-how-real-how-relevant"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "In at least four countries, there will be a general strike on November 14. There are calls to turn it into a European general strike. What to make of the idea, how to operate most fruitfully in connection to these and similar initiatives, is the subject of this article."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/european-wide-general-strike-november-14-how-real-how-relevant)

Greek general strike against austerity in 2010 In at least four countries, there will be a general strike on November 14. There are calls to turn it into a European general strike. What to make of the idea, how to operate most fruitfully in connection to these and similar initiatives, is the subject of this article.

November 14 will – at the very least – see strike action against austerity in four European countries: Spain, Portugal, Greece and Cyprus. (1) There is the potential of much, much more, and people from very diverse backgrounds are working in the direction of en Europe-wide general strike on that day. Does it make sense? How can we contribute in such ways that N14 – as the date is beginning to be called – can become much more than yet another mostly symbolic action such as we have been seeing many times already?

First, the situation itself. Trade union federations have called nationwide one day general strikes for November 14 in the four countries I mentioned. Apparently, union federations in France and Italy are considering the idea as well. Let's be clear on the importance of this. Union federations do not launch these kind of strikes because they want serious resistance to austerity. Rather, they want these strikes as a show of force to strengthen their own positiaon as mediators of the class struggle, as managers of discontent. They want to show governments and bosses: hey, there is a lot of discontent amongst workers. We will try to hold it in check for you; it is our (rather well-paid) job. But you have to give some concessions, you have to soften your stance on austeriry a bit. Only that will enable us to play our role, ony then we can say to our members: trust us, don't rock the boat, we will bring about some improvements. To show governments that the trade union leaders have to be taken into account, trade union leaders call their members to strike, as if to say to govermnent: do you see all these angry workers? Do you feel the disruption they cause, for just one day? Now, do you appreciate our trouble to keep them quiet? Please help us doing so, by giving us concessions to increase our credibility among these workers. Or would you rather have these workers pushing us aside and fighting on their own terms? Would you rather have strtikes without fixed duration, wildcat strikes, all-out class confrontation?

These strikes, then, are entirely bureaucratic in their motivation, as far as trade union functionaries are concerned. Workers, however, tend to see them as opportunities to show their anger, and make their anger felt. Rightly so! For radicals, that makes them relevant. The more a strike call is supported, in as militant a fashion as possible, the stronger workers will feel, the stronger ties of solidarity will be built.. In itself, this does not stop governments or austerity policies. But it builds working class strength and confidence needed for a serious struggle. Trade union leaders use these kind of strikes to parade workers as their stage army. Radical workers, anarchists among them, want to see the soldiers of that army starting to fight on their own account, turning the stage army in an independent force fighting from below. That is whay libertarian communists should, in my view, take these strike calls seriously. Not because we trust the trade unions, but on the contrary, because we doe not trust them, and refuse to leave the struggle in their iron grip.

The general strikes on N14 will not, in themselves, stop austerity or bring down governments. Even a one day European strike will not do that. Greece has seen 20 general strikes of this type. Yet, the government did neither fall nor budge because of that. One can say that, without the discontente expressed through thesee strikes, the Greek goverment and the EU bureaucrats would feel even more arrogantly confident to push on; in that sense, the strikes may have acted as a brake. But it is clear that to beat back austerity, a much more offensive approach – ongoing strikes, occupations, street blockades, confrontation with the state – will be needed (2). But the mobilizations around the strikes can be used as stepping stones in that direction. The same applies to the European wide strike action now being organized and discussed for N14. And yes, when you are striking in Spain in the knowledge that workers in Greece, Portugal and Cyprus (and Italy? And France? And... ?) are out on strike, it probably raises your confidence, making you feel part of an even bigger whole. So yes, by all means, let's support the European-wide general strike – in our own independent fashion. It is not at all the magic trick to end our problems. But we can use it as part of building our fight – and spreading our ideas within the fight.

How? I have not very much to say here about the specifics of struggle in Spain, Portugal, Cyprus and Greece. The general idea is clear: making the strike as forceful as possible, challenging the top-down union bureaucratic grip on events, connecting with ongoing struggles, introducing direct-action dynamics within and around the strike and connected demonstrations. For instance, the anti-austerity protest organized in Londen last Saturday was by trade unions along familiar, bureaucratic, blowing-off-steam-and-then-go-home lines. However, as mentioned in “What October 20 tells us about the state of the movement”, on Libcom (3), Disabled People Against Cuts held a beautiful street blockade with wheelchairs as part of the action which raised the temperture and added to the pressure. Initiatives like these can make mobilizations much more forceful than trade union organizers intend them to be. Radicals in the countries where the strike is on will find their way.

There are, however countries where ther is no general strike call from trade union circles in sight. The Netherlands is one of these countries. Yes, ETUC, the European trade union federation, has made a call for “a day of action and solidarity on 14 November, including strikes, demonstrations, rallies and other actions.” (4) Not quite a call for a general strike, but a step in that direction. The purpose: “mobilising the European trade union movement behind ETUV policies as set down in the Social Compact for Europe” . Whatever is in that document, people will understand this call as a protest against the European-wide austerity policies, at least in their current form. Just like national general strike calls can be used to mobilize around in the direction of a more radical approach, the ETUC call can be used to build in the direction of European-wide strike action and more. This is what people, myself included, are trying to do in the Netherlands.

It is important to do it right, however. There is the temptation to get stuck on trade union territory, to just take the ETUC call, step to the unions and demand that they organize strike action, imploring them, pressurizing them, leaving it up to them. This is the approach that Trotskyists use in Britain: demanding that the TUC organize a general strike. Lenin's Tomb expresses the idea: “there is a basis for mass industrial action to happen if only the trade unions are willing to support it.” (5) Ah, if only! They will solve the problem for us! And what if they don't? Wait for better days and Sell the Paper? I think a much more fruitful approach can and should be tried. The idea of e a general strike on a European scale can be pushed by radical circles, whether anarchists, Occupy-related networks, other formal or informal netwerks of radicals.

For the day itself, street actions can be planned, noisy pots-and-pans protest marches ans assemblies like in Quebec last summer, blockades of buildings where hated, austerity-related institutions are seated, 'ordinary' demonstrations, pickets at embassies of states where general strikes are going forward. People might spontaneously get sick of austerity on that 14th of November as well. Anything to express solidarity with the struggle against austerity. Anyything to raise the anti-austerity temperature. And all exoplicitly connected to the general strike idea for N14. And who knows, there might just be an office department, a factory, a company, where workers are already so fed up and confident that they might come out on strike. There might even be a trade union branch or wing here and there that is sensitive to the mood, and starts supporting the idea. You never know how far you come unless you try. However, our approach should not make itself depend on that unions will or will not do. Independent initiative and organization from the bottom up, are essential. Waiting for the unions would be catastrophic and, more importantly, it is entirely unneccessary.

The idea has been tried before. On May Day this year, calls went out in the US for a general strike. Occupy- and related initiatives spread the call, and organized street protests on that day. No, it was not a general strike. But is spread the idea of such a strike, and it was a step in that direction. No, a combination of the actions that I mentioned for N14 will very likely not amount to a full general strike, it may not even come close. But it would spread the idea that strike action is needed and should be built, it would be a step in the right direction. And maybe it could become a dress rehearsal for something much bigger as well, on the First May 2013...

[1] “Anti-Austerity Allies Coming Together for Cordinated European Strikes” , Common Dreams, 19 oktober 2012, [2] The insights that Thrasybulus expresses in “General strike: Round 20” , on Libcom.org, are vital here. [3] Phil, “What October 20 tells us about the state of the movement” , Libcom.org, 21 October. [4] ETUC, “ETUC day of action and solidarity for a Social Compact for Europe” , October 17 [5] “Mass protests against the cuts” , Lenin's tomb, October 20.

For this article, the forum thread on Libcom, “European general strike? 14 November” , has been very useful.

I was planning on contacting/calling some Dutch leftist organisations to ask them if they are interested in a solidarity action in the Netherlands on November 14. Perhaps you are better informed than me, and already know organisations planning to do something?

Whilst generally of the view that the TUC demonstrations in the UK were more about demobilising the potential for any real opposition to UK austerity policies and rejecting any idea of some automatic step by step build up of worker confidence through each successive TU led 'symbolic' strike action ( the reverse is more likely), I'm sympathetic to the arguments expressed here, if only because despite the origins and motivations of the European Unions call for this particular symbolic action being much the same, any common action accross national borders would be a symbolism of some real significance, more especially if it were able to cross the European 'north/south' and 'inside/outside the Euro' divisions though I'm not sure how likely that would be? Getting another big turnout in the UK even for some symbolic action after the passing of Oct 20 here is probably expecting too much. A weak response isolated to the cronic austerity hit European south might simply reinforce existing prejudices and divisions outside of that region?

Such symbolic TU led strikes at the end of the day are the opposite of self-organised extensions of workers struggles and the class based mass strike - I'm not sure one has any necessary connection to the other?

Such symbolic TU led strikes at the end of the day are the opposite of self-organised extensions of workers struggles and the class based mass strike - I'm not sure one has any necessary connection to the other?

while I agree with your general sentiment here, in terms of the connection between one and the other: I think it's pretty much definite that if you can't get a decent turnout from workers in the first one, then the second one has no chance of even happening.

Blockupy Frankfurt calls for decentralized solidarity actions on 14N .

Let's not forget about the International Student strike supposed to take place from 14 to november 22...

Some people here were interested in the student strike but found the information about it and coordination to be rather poor. My union picked up the idea to promote an education strike here - which is something tough to get across. There is no student movement so to speak of and actually teachers are more likely to protest than students.

There hasn't been a general strike in Poland since 1981. However, the slogan is popular amongst rank and file workers. We go out with strike slogans often and get a lot of support. But verbal support and action are two different things. Probably we will just put ideas together and go out on our street with our own message. The mainstream unions will not support a strike and, at most would make some bullshit protest attended only by full-time activists on the clock.

If there is more info on student strikes or any other radical strikes going on at that time, would appreciate it.

In mindestens vier europäischen Ländern wird es am 14. November einen General Streik geben. Es gib Aufrufe dies in einen europaweiten General Streik zu verwandeln. Was sollen wir mit dieser Idee anfangen, wie kann mensch auf fruchtbarer weise mit solchen Aufrufen und ähnlichen Initiativen operieren, dass ist das Thema dieses Artikels.

Den 14. November werden – zumindest - vier europäischen Ländern mit Streikaktionen begegnen: Spanien, Portugal, Griechenland und Zypern. (1) Es gäbe das Potential für viel, viel mehr und Menschen aus verschiedensten Kontexten arbeiten in die Richtung eines europaweiten General Streiks an diesem Tag. Macht das Sinn? Wie können wir auf eine Art und Weise dazu beitragen, dass der N14 – so wie dieser Tag immer öfter genannt wird - viel mehr werden kann als nur eine weitere hauptsächlich symbolische Aktion, so wie wir sie schon so oft gesehen haben?

Zuerst zur Lage selbst. (Geschäfts-)Gewerkschaften haben in vier Ländern, zu einem landesweiten eintägigen General Streik nämlich an dem kommenden 14. November aufgerufen. Zur Zeit überlegen Gewerkschafts-Föderationen in Frankreich und Italien ebenfalls diese Idee aufzugreifen. Lasst uns im klaren darüber sein wie wichtig das alles ist. Diese Gewerkschafts-Föderationen starten solche Aktionen nicht weil sie sich ernsthaft gegen die Kürzungspolitik stellen wollen. Viel mehr, wollen sie hier stärke zeigen um ihre eigene Position, als Vermittler des Klassen Kampfes herauszustreichen. Sie wollen den Unmut verwalten. Sie wollen damit den Bossen und Managern signalisieren, dass es sehr viel Wut unter den Lohnarbeiter_innen gibt. Wir (die Gewerkschaftsspitzen) werden versuchen sie in Schach zu halten; das ist schließlich unser (sehr gut bezahlter) Job. Aber ihr müsst uns ein paar Zugeständnisse machen, ihr müsst eure Kürzungspolitik etwas sanfter gestalten, nur so wir es uns möglich diese unsere Rolle zu übernehmen. Nur so können wir unseren Mitgliedern sagen: Vertraut uns, schaukelt das Schiff nicht zu arg. Wir sind dabei Verbesserungen durchzusetzen. Um Regierungen weis zu machen das Gewerkschafts-Führer berücksichtigt werden müssen befehligen sie ihren Mitgliedern zu streiken, so als wollten sie der jeweiligen Regierung weis machen: Seht ihr all diese wütenden Lohnarbeiter_innen? Fühlt ihr den Wirbel den sie für nur einen Tag anzetteln vermochten? Nun, schätzt ihr all unsere Mühe sie ruhig zu halten? Macht ein paar Zugeständnisse an uns und wir werden wieder helfen hier für Ordnung zu sorgen, oder wollt ihr, dass diese Lohnarbeiter_innen uns abstoßen um selbst einen Kampf in ihrem Sinne zu organisieren? Wollt ihr lieber einen Streik ohne ein fixiertes Ende, wilde Streiks, eine echte Klassenkonfrontation?

Diese Streiks sind also in ihrer Motivation zur Gänze bürokratisch, soweit es in der Zuständigkeit von (geschäfts-)Gewerkschafts-Funktionären liegt. Lohnarbeiter_inne sehen in ihnen aber die Möglichkeit ihrer Wut Ausdruck zu verleihen und drücken diese auch aus.Und das ist auch gut so! Für Radikale - das unterstreicht ihre Wichtigkeit - je mehr sie einen Streikaufruf unterstützen, so militant wie es der Moment möglich macht, desto stärker werden die Lohnarbeiter_innen diese Kräfte spüren und desto stärker werden die Banden der Solidarität sich herausbilden können. Das allein hält natürlich keine Regierung von ihrer Kürzungspolitik ab, aber es bildet so ein Klassenbewusstsein und ein Stärke heraus, welche ein ernsthafter Kampf benötigt. Geschäfts-Gewerkschaften benutzen Streiks dieser Art um in einer Arbeiter_innen Parade diese als ihre Bühnen-Armee vorzuführen. Radikale Lohnarbeiter_innen, und Anarchist_innen unter ihnen, wollen aber, dass diese Lohnabhängigen den Kampf in ihre eigenen Hände überführen, um diese Bühnen-Armee in eine unabhängige Organisierung von Unten zu verwandeln. Das ist auch der Grund warum ich meine, dass libertäre Kommunist_innen diesen Aufruf ernst nehmen sollten. Nicht etwa weil wir in diese (Geschäfts-)Gewerkschaft vertrauen setzen würden, gegenteilig! Weil wir ihnen nicht trauen und wir nicht unseren Kampf in ihren eisernen Griff delegieren werden.

Der General Streik am 14.November wird nicht alleine die Kürzungspolitik stoppen oder gar Regierungen stürzen. Nicht einmal ein eintägiger europaweiter Streik würde das vollbringen. Griechenland sah 20 General Streiks dieser Art. Bis jetzt wurde deswegen noch keine Regierung gestürzt nicht einmal erschüttert. Man könnte sagen, dass ohne dieser ausgedrückten Ablehnung, welche durch diese Streiks zum Ausdruck gebracht wurde, die griechische Regierung und die EU_Bürokrat_innen noch arroganter davon Überzeugt wären das Spiel noch weiter in diese Richtung zu forcieren. In diesem Sinne haben die Streiks vielleicht als eine Art bremse fungiert. Aber es ist augenscheinlich, dass um die Austerität zurück zu schlagen, eine viele stärkere, offensiver Verfahrensweise – unbefristete Streiks, Besetzungen, Straßenblockaden, Konfrontationen mit dem Staat – von Nöten wären. (2) Die Mobilisierungen um den Streik können als ein wichtiger Stein in diese Richtung betrachtet werden. Das gleiche gilt für den europaweiten Streik der jetzt für den N14 organisiert und diskutiert wird. Und ja, wenn du in Spanien streikst mit dem Bewusstsein darüber, das Lohnarbeiter_innen in Griechenland, Portugal und Zypern (und Italien? Und Frankreich? Und …?) streiken, dann wird es wohl deinen Mut steigern, weil du ein Teil von einem noch größerem Ganzen geworden bist. Und damit ja, mit allen Mitteln, lasst uns den europaweiten General Streik unterstützen – in unserer selbstgewählten Art und Weise. Es ist in keinster Weise das magische Ende unserer Probleme, aber wir können es als einen Teil unseres werdenden Kampfes betrachten – es gebt uns auch Gelegenheit unsere Ideen innerhalb des Kampfes zu verbreitern.

Wie? Darüber kann ich hier nicht detailliert auf Spezifitäten der jeweiligen Kämpfe in Spanien, Portugal, Zypern und Griechenland eingehen. Generell ist die Idee klar: Den Streik so stark wie möglich zu machen, die „von oben nach unten“ stimmenden, bürokratischen Gewerkschaften herauszufordern, sich andauernden Kämpfen anzuschließen, direkte Aktion als dynamische Aktionsform im und um den Streik herum und dessen Demonstrationen anzuwenden . Als Beispiel dazu, die Anti-Sozialkürzungs- Proteste die letzten Samstag in London von Gewerkschaften in gewohnter Manier: Dampf ablassen und dann nach Hause gehen, mobilisiert wurden. Wie bereits in „Was uns der 20. Oktober über den Zustand der Bewegung aussagt“, auf Libcom (3), „körperlich eingeschränkte Menschen gegen die Kürzungen“ haben eine wunderbare Straßen-Blockade mit Rollstühlen, als Teil der Aktion, welche die Temperatur der Demonstration erheblich ansteigen ließ und den Druck erheblich steigerte. Initiativen wie diese können Mobilisierungen stärker ermächtigen, als dies von Geschäfts-Gewerkschaften für gewöhnlich intendiert ist.

Es gibt Länder wo kein General Streik Aufruf von (Geschäfts-)Gewerkschaften in Sicht ist. Die Niederlande ist eines dieser Länder (wie auch Österreich). Ja, ETUC, die Europäische (Geschäfts-) Gewerkschafts Förderation hat in einem Aufruf zur „einem Tag der Aktion und Solidarität am 14. November, mit Streiks, Kundgebungen, Demonstrationszügen und andere Aktionen“ aufgerufen. (4) Nicht gerade ein Aufruf zum General Streik, aber ein Schritt in diese Richtung. Das Ziel: „ die Europäischen (Geschäfts-) Gewerkschafts Bewegung hinter die ETUV-Agenda zu mobilisieren, um sich in diesem Sinne, dieser „Sozialen Übereinkunft für Europa“ (Anm. „Social Compact for Europe“) zu positionieren. Was auch immer in diesem Dokument steht, die Menschen werden diesen Aufruf als einen Protestakt, gegen die europaweite Kürzungspolitik verstehen, zumindest in dieser jetzigen Form. Sowie nationale General Streiks in Richtung einer radikaleren Gangart mobilisiert werden können, kann der ETUC Aufruf dazu verwendet werden; in Richtung einer europaweite Streikaktion und darüber hinaus zu fungieren. Das ist was Menschen, mich inkludiert, in den Niederlanden versuchen zu tun. Wie auch immer, hierbei ist es wichtig, es richtig zu machen. Es gibt die Verlockung im (Geschäfts-)Gewerkschaftsterritorium stecken zu bleiben, also nur den ETUC Aufruf heranzuziehen, an die Gewerkschaften heranzutreten uns sie aufzufordern Streik Aktionen zu organisieren, sich an sie zu wenden um Druck zu machen, also das Feld ihnen zu überlassen. Das ist ein Gangart, welche Trotzkisten in England praktizieren: Zu fordern das der TUC einen General Streik organisiert. „Lenins Grab“ erklärt die Idee: „Es verhelfe uns zur Basis für eine massive industrielle Aktion, wenn nur die (Geschäfts-) Gewerkschaften willig sind es zu unterstützen.“ (5) Auch, wenn nur! Sie werden die Probleme für uns erledigen! Und was wenn nicht? Sollen wir dann auf bessere Tage warten und dieses Chance verspielen? Ich denke ein sehr viel fruchtbarer Ansatz kann und sollte gewählt werden. Die Idee eines europaweiten General Streiks kann von radikaleren Zirkeln forciert werden, ob von Anarchist_innen oder im Occupy-Spektrum oder andere formelle und informelle Zirkeln spielt keine Rolle.

Für den Tag selbst, können Straßen-Aktionen geplant werden, lärmende auf Kochtöpfen hämmernde Demos und Kundgebungen, wie letzten Sommer in Quebec. Blockaden von Gebäuden die wir hassen, die in Zusammenhang zu Institutionen stehen welche an der Kürzungspolitik beteiligt sind, sowie „gewöhnliche“ Demonstrationen, Streikposten vor den Vertretungen in deren Länder General Streiks stattfinden. Vielleicht werden die Menschen auch spontan der Kürzungspolitik überdrüssig, an diesem 14.November. Alles was irgendwie Solidarität mit den Kämpfen gegen die Kürzungspolitik zum Ausdruck bringt. Alles was die Anti-Austeritätstemperatur ansteigen lässt und alles was sich explizit dem General Streik am 14.November anschließt. Wer weiß wirklich wie viele Lohnarbeiter_inne es satt haben und entschlossen sind den nächsten Schritt zu machen, auf die Strasse zu gehen um sich auch anzuschließen. Vielleicht gibt es sogar eine Gewerkschaftssparte oder einen Flügel, hier und dort, welche bereits hellhörig für solche Ideen sind und welche daraufhin die Idee zu unterstützen beginnen. Wir werden nie wissen wie weit wir kommen können, wenn wir es nicht versuchen. Jedenfalls sollte unser Zugang nicht bedeuten, dass wir uns selbst von den Willen oder Nicht-Willen der großen Gewerkschaften abhängig machen. Unabhängige Initiativen und Initiativen von Unten, sind essenziell. Auf die (Geschäfts-) Gewerkschaften zu warten wäre katastrophal und - viel wichtiger - es ist vollkommen unnötig.

Die Idee dahinter wurde bereits zuvor ausprobiert. Am 1.May dieses Jahr, gingen in den USA verschiedene Aufrufe für einen General Streik hinaus. Occupy- und damit in Zusammenhang stehende Initiativen verbreiteten diesen Aufruf, und organisierten an diesem Tag Straßenproteste. Nein, es gab keinen General Streik, aber die Idee eines solchen Streiks wurde in die Öffentlichkeit getragen und es war damit ein Schritt in diese Richtung. Nein, eine Kombination von diesen Aktionen die von mir für N14 genannt wurden, werden wahrscheinlich nicht zu einem flächendeckenden General Streik führen, vielleicht auch nicht einmal diesem nahe kommen. Aber die Idee, dass eine solcher Streik notwendig ist und das wir beginnen die Voraussetzungen dafür zu schaffen, würde sich verbreiten. Jedenfalls wäre es ein Schritt in die richtige Richtung. Und wer weiß, vielleicht kann es zu einer Generalprobe für etwas viel größeres werden, am Ersten Mai 2013.

In the current context is meaningless stop working a single day. State and companies are capable to absorb its efects and make it harmful to workers that support the strike. The only solution in sight is a permanent and active general strike. But in this globalized world the response must be gobal. Single acts in a country don't have effects in the market economy. Similar situations in hundred of countries allow the coordination. As simple as stablish a common date, 14-N. http://tarcoteca.blogspot.com.es/2012/10/internationa-call-14-n-towards-world.html

Prospects for the 14-N Although the call for general strike by Bourgeois unions seems to us like help them perpetuating their positions and maintain their status and privileges, paralyzing the true progress of the population, we believe that there are very good reasons to support the strikeit, so we will be in first line with all our buts and our criticism. Capitalists could deal with each of the other general strikes in the differenct countries becouse we didn't understood how to organized the global stand. Now seems to be the first time of a global response.

Front liness are two: one for internal ideological awakening to the alienated and an other external against political struggle and the oligarchy. Hopefully at least serve to unmask all the tricksters and the entire society wakes up from this nightmare of democratic dictatorship.

The Belgian socialist union (ABVV) has also decided to strike on the 14th of Nov, the other unions are considering it.

Translation in Dutch of the text International Call: N 14 Towards World Permanent General Strike , mentioned and quoted in tarcoteca's ciomment above.

Yes, I wondered about that too, checked, and found indications on a Trotskyist website, HERE. . A fragment:

het ABVV Gewest Luik-Huy-Waremme besliste intussen al tot een 24-urenstaking, net als de ACOD-LRB (Lokale en Regionale Besturen) Brussel, de Métallos Wallonie-Bruxelles (ABVV) en de FGTB-Jeunes.

It says that the trade union branches mentioned, among thers the ABVV district branch of Liège, support the strike call.

France: unions call for big rallies as part of the N 14 mobilization.

I live in Italy and 14 November I will not be square. I'm tired of deadlines rituals that do not change anything. We have to find other forms of struggle that are most effective against the neo-liberal project of the devastation of society.

[Vivo in Italia e il 14 novembre non sarò in piazza. Sono stanco di scadenze rituali che non cambiano nulla. Dobbiamo trovare altre forme di lotta che risultino più efficaci contro il progetto neoliberista di devastazione della società.]
