---
title: "Diary Virginia Woolf During 1926 General Strike"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/diary-virginia-woolf-during-1926-general-strike"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Indifferent account of the 1926 General Strike by writer Virginia Woolf."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/diary-virginia-woolf-during-1926-general-strike)

Indifferent account of the 1926 General Strike by writer Virginia Woolf.

An exact diary of the Strike would be interesting. For instance, it is now a 1/4 to 2: there is a brown fog; nobody is building; it is drizzling. The first thing in the morning we stand at the window & watch the traffic in Southampton Row. This is incessant. Everyone is bicycling; motor cars are huddled up with extra people. There are no buses. No placards. no newspapers. The men are at work in the road; water, gas & electricity are allowed; but at 11 the light was turned off. I sat in the press in the brown fog, while L. wrote an article for the Herald. A very revolutionary looking young man on a cycle arrived with the British Gazette. L. is to answer an article in this. All was military stern a little secret. Then Clive dropped in, the door being left open. He is offering himself to the Government. Maynard excited, wants the H[ogarth]. P[ress]. to bring out a skeleton number of the Nation. It is all tedious & depressing, rather like waiting in a train outside a station. Rumours are passed round—that the gas wd. be cut off at 1—false of course. One does not know what to do. And nature has laid it on thick today—fog, rain, cold. A voice, rather commonplace & official, yet the only common voice left, wishes us good morning at 10. This is the voice of Britain, to wh. we can make no reply. The voice is very trivial, & only tells us hat the Prince of Wales is coming back (from Biarritz), that the London streets present an unprecedented spectacle.

No change. "London calling the British Isles. Good morning every- one". That is how it begins at 10. The only news that the archbishops are conferring, & ask our prayers that they may be guided right. Whether this means action, we know not. We know nothing. Mrs Cartwright walked from Hampstead. She & L. got heated arguing, she being anti- labour; because she does not see why they should be supported, & observes men in the street loafing instead of working. Very little work done by either of us today. A cold, wet day, with sunny moments. All arrangements unchanged. Girl came to make chair covers, having walked from Shoreditch, but enjoyed it. Times sent for 25 Violas. Question whether to bring out a skeleton Roneo Nation. Leonard went to the office, I to the Brit[ish] Mus[eum]; where all was chill serenity, dignity & severity. Written up are the names of great men; & we all cower like mice nibbling crumbs in our most official discreet impersonal mood beneath. I like this dusty bookish atmosphere. Most of the readers seemed to have rubbed their noses off & written their eyes out. Yet they have a life they like—believe in the necessity of making books, I suppose: verify, collate, make up other books, for ever. It must be 15 years since I read here. I came home & found L. & Hubert [Henderson] arriving from the office—Hubert did what is now called "taking a cup of tea", which means an hour & a halfs talk about the Strike. Here is his prediction: if it is not settled, or in process, on Monday, it will last 5 weeks. Today no wages are paid. Leonard said he minded this more than the war & Hubert told us how he had travelled in Germany, & what brutes they were in 1912. He thinks gas & electricity will go next; had been at a journal- ists meeting where all were against labour (against the general strike that is) & assumed Government victory. L. says if the state wins & smashes T[rades]. U[nion]s he will devote his life to labour: if the archbishop succeeds, he will be baptised. Now to dine at the Commercio to meet Clive.

There is no news of the strike. The broadcaster has just said that we are praying today. And L. & I quarrelled last night. I dislike the tub thumper in him; he the irrational Xtian in me. I will write it all out later— my feelings about the Strike; but I am now writing to test my theory that there is consolation in expression. Unthinkingly, I refused just now to lunch with the Phil Bakers, who fetched L. in their car. Suddenly, 10 minutes ago, I began to regret this profoundly. How I should love the talk, & seeing the house, & battling my wits against theirs. Now the sensible thing to do is to provide some pleasure to balance this, which I cd. not have had, if I had gone. I can only think of writing this, & going round the Square. Obscurely, I have my clothes complex to deal with. When I am asked out my first thought is, but I have no clothes to go in. Todd has never sent me the address of the shop; & I may have annoyed her by refusing to lunch with her. But the Virginia who refuses is a very instinctive & therefore powerful person. The reflective & sociable only comes to the surface later. Then the conflict.

Baldwin broadcast last night: he rolls his rs; tries to put more than mortal strength into his words. "Have faith in me. You elected me 18 months ago. What have I done to forfeit your confidence? Can you not trust me to see justice done between man & man?" Impressive as it is to hear the very voice of the Prime Minister, descendant of Pitt & Chatham, still I can't heat up my reverence to the right pitch. I picture the stalwart oppressed man, bearing the world on his shoulders. And suddenly his self assertiveness becomes a little ridiculous. He becomes megalomaniac. No I dont trust him: I don't trust any human being, however loud they bellow & roll their rs.

Quarrel with L. settled in studio. Oh, but how incessant the arguments & interruptions are! As I write, L. is telephoning to Hubert. We are getting up a petition. There was a distinct thaw (we thought) last night. The Arch B. & Grey both conciliatory. So we went to bed happy. Today ostensibly the same dead lock; beneath the surface all sorts of currents, of which we get the most contradictory reports. Dear old Frankie has a story (over the fire in the bookshop) of an interview between Asquith & Reading which turned Reading hostile to the men. Later, through Clive, through Desmond, Asquith is proved to be at the Wharfe, 60 miles from Lord Reading. Lady Wimbore gave a party— brought Thomas & Baldwin together. Meeting mysteriously called off today. Otherwise strike wd. have been settled. I to H of Commons this morning with L.'s article to serve as stuffing for Hugh Dalton in the Commons this afternoon. All this humbug of police & marble statues vaguely displeasing. But the Gvt. provided me with buses both ways, & no stones thrown. Silver & crimson guard at Whitehall; the cenotaph, & men bare heading themselves. Home to find Tom Marshall caballing with L.; after lunch to [Birrell & Garnett's] bookshop, where the gossip (too secret for the telephone) was imparted; to London Library where Gooch—a tall, pale mule, affable & long winded, was seen, & Molly dustily diligently reading the Dublin Review for 1840, walk home; Clive, to refute gossip; James to get St Loe to sign; then Maynard ringing up to command us to print the Nation as the N. Statesman is printed; to wh. I agreed, & L. disagreed; then dinner; a motor car collision—more telephones ringing at the moment 9.5.

I may as well continue to write—this book is used to scandalous mistreatment—while I wait—here interruptions began which lasted till the present moment/ when I write from 12.30 to 3 with Gerald Brenan in the study composing with infinite difficulty a letter to Mr Galsworthy. Arguing about the Ar[chbisho]p of Canterbury with Jack Squire at 12 seems now normal, but not—how often do I repeat—nearly as exciting as writing To the Lighthouse or about de Q[uincey]. I believe it is false psychology to think that in after years these details will be interesting. The war is now barren sand after all. But one never knows: & waiting about, writing serves to liberate the mind from the fret & itch of these innumerable details. Squire doesn't want to "knuckle under". To kneel is the duty of the Church. The Church has no connection with the nation. Events are that the Roneo workers refuse to set up L.'s article in the Nation, in which he says that the Strike is not illegal or unconstitutional. Presumably this is a little clutch of the Government throttle. Mr Baldwin has been visiting the Zoo. In the middle of lunch admirable Miss Bulley arrives, having visited Conway unsuccessfully. St Loe has joined. So Rose Macaulay & Lytton. Tonight the names are to be handed in; & then perhaps silence will descend upon us. Ralph & Gerald are our emissaries. But then everyone rings up—the most unlikely people—[Donald] Brace for instance, Kahan; the woman comes with the new sofa cover. Yester- day Ralph & Frances Marshall were in a railway accident. She had her teeth jangled. One man was killed; another had his leg broken—the result of driving a train without signals, by the efforts of ardent optimistic undergraduates. Billing has been in to say he will print anything, all his men being back & needing work. So, as poor MacDermott has been dead since January, perhaps the Nation will be done by them. Come to think of it, almost all our type is standing, so our printing was in any case hardly feasible. Must I now ring up James? Day's Library boy was set upon by roughs, had his cycle overturned, but kept his books & was unhurt after calling here for 6 Tree. Tree dribbles along. There is an occasional order. Mrs C[artwright]. arrives on Faith's bicycle which is red with rust.

The Strike was settled about 1.15—or it was then broadcast. I was in Tottenham Court Rd. at 1 & heard Bartholomew & Fletcher's megaphone declaim that the T.U.C. leaders were at Downing Street; came home to find that neither L. or Nelly had heard this: 5 minutes later, the wireless. They told us to stand by & await important news. Then a piano played a tune. Then the solemn broadcaster assuming incredible pomp & gloom & speaking one word to the minute read out: Message from 10 Downing Street. The T.U.C. leaders have agreed that Strike shall be withdrawn. Instantly L. dashed off to telephone to the office, Nelly to tell Pritchard's clerk, & I to Mrs C. (But N[elly]. was beforehand) then we finished lunch; then I rang up Clive—who proposes that we should have a drink tonight. I saw this morning 5 or 6 armoured cars slowly going along Oxford Street; on each two soldiers sat in tin helmets, & one stood with his hand at the gun which was pointed straight ahead ready to fire. But I also noticed on one a policeman smoking a cigarette. Such sights I dare say I shall never see again; & dont in the least wish to. Already (it is now 10 past 2) men have appeared at the hotel with drainpipes. Also Grizzle has won her case against the Square.

I suppose all pages devoted to the Strike will be skipped, when I read over this book. Oh that dull old chapter, I shall say. Excitements about what are called real things are always unutterably transitory. Yet it is gloomy—& L. is gloomy, & so am I unintelligibly—today because the Strike continues—no railwaymen back: vindictiveness has now seized our masters. Government shillyshallies. Apparently, the T.U.C. agreed to terms wh. the miners now reject. Anyhow it will take a week to get the machinery of England to run again. Trains are dotted about all over England. Labour, it seems clear, will be effectively diddled again, & perhaps rid of its power to make strikes in future. Printers still out at the Nation. In short, the strain removed, we all fall out & bicker & backbite. Such is human nature—& really I dont like human nature unless all candied over with art. We dined with a strike party last night & went back to Clive's. A good deal was said about art there. Good dull Janet Vaughan, reminding me of Emma, joined us. I went to my dressmaker, Miss Brooke, & found it the most quiet & friendly & even enjoyable of proceedings. I have a great lust for lovely stuffs, & shapes; wh. I have not gratified since Sally Young died. A bold move this, but now I'm free of the fret of clothes, which is worth paying for, & need not parade Oxford Street.

Waiting for L. to come back from chess with Roger: 11.25. I think nothing need be said of the Strike. As tends to happen, one's mind slips after the crisis, & what the settlement is, or will be, I know not.
