---
title: "Interview New British Organization Collective Action"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/interview-new-british-organization-collective-action"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "On 1 May 2012, a new anarchist communist organization called Collective Action was launched in the UK, together with the release of a statement (Where We Stand: Formation of a new Anarchist Communist project in the UK). In an attempt to clear up some points that were not clear from the statement or "
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/interview-new-british-organization-collective-action)

On 1 May 2012, a new anarchist communist organization called Collective Action was launched in the UK, together with the release of a statement (Where We Stand: Formation of a new Anarchist Communist project in the UK). In an attempt to clear up some points that were not clear from the statement or from the other documents published by the organization, Anarkismo.net has carried out this interview, in which the answers to our questions represent the jointly-held positions of Collective Action's members.

Can you elaborate on the circumstances that gave rise to Collective Action?

Over the last few years some Collective Action members had attempted to bring about political and organisational changes to the Anarchist Federation. These changes were not forthcoming and after a period of time they became increasingly frustrated at what was perceived to be a liberal cultural attitude dominating the organisation, as well as, ironically, a reluctance to change. At the same time we – as a group of anarchist communists – felt that it was necessary for the preservation of the anarchist communist tradition in modern Britain, for like-minded people to refocus their activity – primarily on understanding current class composition and how that best informs how we insert our ideas and tactics within our class. We describe this process as “Regroupment” and believed a separate association, independent from other organisations, was the best way to organise that process.

How do you see Collective Action with regard to the other national anarchist organisations in the UK – Solidarity Federation, Anarchist Federation and Liberty & Solidarity?

The Solidarity Federation is an anarcho-syndicalist union and as such has very little to do with our perspective. Collective Action should be looked upon as a current within the anarchist communist movement seeking Regroupment. In that respect, we are fundamentally divergent to the ideas and aims of a group like SolFed. Likewise, the Anarchist Federation is essentially a propaganda outlet that has a lackadaisical attitude towards organisation, which is in contrast to how we believe an anarchist communist group should operate. Also, as far as we can tell, AFed does not agree with our outlook that a process of Regroupment is necessary or even desirable. Liberty & Solidarity is a socialist-syndicalist group affiliated to the Anarkismo Statement. As an organisation of this type we do not perceive many areas of commonality between us. L&S members are active within housing campaigns and the UK section of the Industrial Workers of the World (where we also have militants). Like Collective Action, Liberty & Solidarity emerged as a project from dissatisfied Anarchist Federation members. However, we think both our analyses and proposals for alternatives are ultimately at odds. This is both in terms of our principle focus on Regroupment as well as our political disagreements regarding our analysis of the conservative character of the trade unions and their ideological orientation towards a socialist-syndicalist (as opposed to anarchist communist) position. They have also proposed various cosmetic changes to anarchist activism – such as abandoning the label "anarchist” – which we are strongly opposed to.

In your launch statement you provide a pretty damning analysis of the anti-austerity movement in the UK. Do you believe there are any grounds for hope in this respect?

There is always hope, but we shouldn’t let hope blind us into thinking that something can be successful just because we want it to be. There is a structural problem with the anti-austerity movement; this is obvious in the way that the TUC and Marxist Left have, as always, sought to create and to dominate power structures that have led and will always lead to stagnation. Intervention by anarchists in that respect has been negligible and there have been no meaningful alternatives presented to counter those worn-out Leftist strategies. There is also a more pervasive ideological problem that the anti-austerity movement faces, in that the nature of the struggles do not follow the necessary trend of building a counter-power capable of eventually creating communist reconstruction. What is meant by that is that we are not confident that existing struggles have the ability to be radically transformed into something that can meaningfully forward our objective of taking control of the means of production.

How do we resolve this particular problem? For us, we are not sure whether it is even worth attempting, since the actual struggles that the anti-austerity movement is involved in are struggles for a minority, a privileged section of the working class, whose conditions do not speak to the marginalised majority, who in recent months have actually demonstrated a willingness to build a counter power – look at the August riots. This was the beginning of a genuine expression of rage that, if armed with the right ideas, could have cemented an escalation of class conflict. Collective Action wants to investigate how we insert anarchist communist ideas and methods into these communities and connect the politics to the otherwise disconnected expressions of frustration and anger that exist towards capitalism and the State. As such, we are not sure how these parochial anti-austerity “groups” fit into that long-term objective.

In your launch statement you describe the principle objective of CA as "Regroupment", to revisit and rekindle your politics. Could you elaborate on what this means?

Regroupment essentially means sitting down together and working out what is going on and, in that context, what we want to achieve and how we aim to achieve it. It’s as simple as that. More broadly, we see Regroupment as the reorientation of revolutionaries to re-engage with anarchist communist ideas and history as well as engaging with new ideas and theory that is being published. This is why we are looking at Specifism and the Platformist tradition, as well as taking very seriously the ideas of the new autonomist Regroupment current Plan C, which has emerged in the UK, as well as the theoretical Sic Communisation Collective.

This collective education and engagement with contemporary ideas will help us develop our analysis and better inform our activity. We understand that some will consider this to be “navel gazing”; largely because of an anti-intellectual attitude that seems to exist in the anarchist movement, but also because there is this misconception that what anarchists have to be doing is “action”, irrespective of what it means or how it fits into a general strategy for victory. Ultimately, we say that if people feel the activity they are participating in is genuinely working towards building communist reconstruction, then that’s great. We recognise that in reality the current activity of the movement cannot achieve victory and therefore a refocus on our movement and how we operate is necessary, whether we like it or not. Having said that, we continue to be militants in our localities, involved in struggles that we consider appropriate and therefore our thinking and discussions are informed by our past and ongoing experiences.

As a self-identified "Specifist" group do you perceive any points of distinction in respect to the UK anarchist movement?

"Specifism" (or Especifismo) is a political current principally associated with the theory and organising practices of the Anarchist Federation of Rio de Janiero (FARJ) and the Uruguayan Anarchist Federation (FAU). In the English-speaking world it is often considered simply a variant of anarchist Platformism, but as the FARJ argue, and we agree, the ideas are much broader and richer than this. Neither are these ideas just that of the FARJ and FAU, as they locate their ideas in the spirit of the organisationalist theories of Malatesta, Bakunin and Kropotkin (this is actually also true of the Platform but is rarely acknowledged). We think this notion of engaging in a more critical reappraisal of these original anarchist thinkers is valuable and allows us to bypass the more cultural articulations of anarchism that have become intermingled with anarchist practice in the latter half of the twentieth century. However, it needs to be clear that this process is not about re-affirming some form of ideological purity; we revisit these thinkers because of their role as organised revolutionaries whose ideas were earned through experience of social struggle. Our task in this sense is to identify the comparable contexts and lessons while also updating and modifying our approaches for the conditions and class composition under advanced capitalism. There has been a recent re-emergence in the English-speaking world of classical anarchist literature, e.g. Van Der Walt and Schmidt's Black Flame and McKay's volume on Proudhon, which has proved very useful in respect to this.

In terms of points of differentiation, specifism – as a form of praxis – has a strategic and programmatic focus that we see as lacking (or at least partially lacking) in other organisations. We see this as related to the prevalence of a spontaneist current in anarchism, quite distinct from the organisational theories of Bakunin and others.

Specifists argue that, foremost, anarchists need to understand their role as a revolutionary minority and how they relate to a wider and much more complex terrain of social struggle. We believe these questions are increasingly pressing in respect to the current economic and social climate and the clarity of the specifist approach is a useful tool to begin answering them.

We reject the, currently quite popular, idea that anarchist activity is simply about broadening and escalating resistance. Undoubtedly this is a component of building class confidence and solidarity, but as a strategy in itself it doesn't do justice to our ideas. The questions that revolutionaries should be putting to themselves now is not just how they can fight cuts and break the consensus on austerity but what part they can play (however small) in escalating social struggles (or playing their part in organising new ones) towards a consolidation of counter-power and process of communisation.

How do you conceive of anarchosyndicalism, given that you (critically) support it in some format, but clearly differ from Solidarity Federation?

Liberty & Solidarity's interest is in "independent" – as opposed to anarchist – syndicalism (which they endorse uncritically). For AFed it would be fair to say that both them and SolFed have a close working relationship and co-operate on many campaigns. There is also joint membership in some instances, although AFed are nothing like an organised faction within SolFed. It's only in recent years that SolFed have begun to operate as an organising union so in terms of both their and AFed's activity as propaganda groups they were often quite close. AFed make it clear in their literature that they do not support the organisation of mass, anarcho-syndicalist unions, seeing them as both impractical and open to co-option. Instead they talk of the need for informal workplace resistance groups. This concept, however, is often applied quite broadly and has been argued to include some aspects of anarcho-syndicalist strategy. We have criticised this on the basis that it lacks a clear and programmatic focus.

For us the issue is more about the context and how certain methodologies relate to both the existing class composition and the resources available to organisers. In this sense we recognise that some elements of anarcho-syndicalist strategy are almost universally applicable – being basic elements of organisational anarchism from the time of Bakunin – while also stressing the need for continual and critical investigation on the part of disciplined and organised anarchist communist militants.

Why do you describe yourself as an "association"? Is there any political significance to this term?

In very practical terms it denotes the scope of our project – a small number of comrades coming together for a specific purpose with shared goals. We felt it was important not to adopt the labels of "federation" or even "organisation" prematurely. These labels should be meaningful where they are applied.

The term "association" does, however, also have a deeper meaning within our tradition. Early Utopian socialists favoured the term "associationism" to characterise the voluntary yet still organised basis of free communism. Malatesta even went so far as to say the term should replace anarchism for anarchists.

How would you describe your orientation in respect to the Anarkismo project?

Anarkismo, and the Anarkismo groups, have been a strong influence on our theoretical development to this point. Our study of Anarkismo texts, alongside recent investigations into communisation theory, and their resonance with our own experiences are key factors in terms of both the initiation and continued development of the CA project. We feel the North American groups in particular are facing similar contexts, and answering similar questions, to ourselves. There are a number of points of principle in which we currently disagree with the Anarkismo Statement. These are issues that we hope can be clarified and debated through the international platform that Anarkismo provides.

As we aim to understand more concretely the present situation and how we relate to it as a movement, our focus – as an association – is to collate our investigations, ideas and analysis into a series of articles. We are currently working on two series, one of which is entitled the “Class Composition Series” and the other the “Regroupment Series”. We see this process as very much a practical one. We want to work out what activity is necessary and how best we implement that activity to achieve agreed objectives.

Within the process of Regroupment we are also aiming to participate in movement-wide public discussions with our sister Regroupment organisation Plan C. Our first talk will be at the Sheffield Anarchist Bookfair on Saturday, 23rd June. There we will discuss how we have felt the need to develop these Regroupment currents and how we see ourselves moving forward.

Your membership criteria has been criticised as being “hierarchical”. Why have you chosen to structure things in this way?

The first thing we have to make clear to people is that we are not a membership organisation per se. We do not seek to build membership as other groups do, making their membership criteria extremely simple, to the detriment of political stability. We don’t have the aim of getting as many people as possible to join us, and do not consider ourselves a big tent. We do not accept that people with varying degrees of agreement on core principles and values can become members without there being any concern for the theoretical and tactical integrity of the organisation. This is why we take potential membership seriously and why we have structured the process in the way that we have.

Our aim in terms of membership is to build a base of anarchist communist militants and organisers who share full agreement on theory and tactics and who can equitably contribute in both time and ideas to the association. We recognise that people are at varying and different levels in both knowledge and time and therefore, to safeguard the integrity of the organisation (in terms of theory and function), we have chosen to use a system of membership whereby we can ensure that militants are empowering themselves and the organisation through their activity. This structure allows us to address openly the individual needs of members, especially in terms of their relationship to the organisation and the theory we are trying to build. Having an associate membership period is the most accountable way to achieve this. Some may see this as a hierarchy of membership, but if that’s the case then it is our view that the concept of “hierarchy” is being misused. No-one in Collective Action has any authority over anyone else; no power relationship is being replicated by having full members and associate members – it is a voluntary, equitable and accountable process.

Recent years have seen the emergence of new forms of politics and political protest, such as the mobilizations around the Arab Spring and the Occupy movement; how does what CA is doing relate to that?

These issues are of interest to all revolutionaries at this point. In the past few years, on a global scale, we've seen an explosion in social unrest. In many ways these new forms of protest (although how practically new they are could be open to debate) sets the stage for the Regroupment process. Are our existing models of intervention sufficient? Are we organised along the right lines under the correct terms? Are we using all the opportunities available to us? Etc., etc. In respect to many of these, we felt the anarchist movement in the UK was lacking clear answers. This was a sentiment shared by a project emerging independently but at a very similar time to ours – "Plan C". At present we are both still working on our ideas (although we consider ourselves to be on fraternal terms with the network) so wouldn't want to make many substantive statements on this. However, we think that on a broader level it shows that this process of questioning and self-criticism is both required and emerging.

So is 'anarchist communist' a way some platformist-esque groups attempt to avoid using that term? I've noticed this...

I guess some of my questions would be...these platformist/especifismo/Anarkismo groups always talk a lot about organization. Indeed, the reason that most of us even know they exist is because this is the vast majority of their written output. But what to they actually do? At one time, I thought a lot of the South American groups, largely because they were a link to anarchism that wasn't based in Europe or North America, but I actually don't really know what they do. There's exceptions of course, WSM does a decent job of writing about what they're involved in and saying why, but a lot of these other groups just don't. I think it would be worth taking a page out of the IWW's book and writing about the process of learning and organizing (with real life examples). This is something I rarely see with the Anarkismo type groups and I think its fair to call the question because of all the 'its time to actually do something' type statements I see from these groups.

Also, with all the talk of being 'more organized', my experience in this milieu is that these groups are more like informal networks at best and rarely live up to their talk about organization. Actually, coming out of the more common anarchisty circles in the US, I was shocked about this. In some cases, the primitivists/insurrectionaries/whatever are vastly more organized than the political organizations. Where they aren't, its pseudo-democratic centralist/Marxist-Leninist stuff like the FARJ's 'concentric circles' or L&S as I understand them (which I'm not always against every aspect of this, but have problems with regardless). In other ways, I don't understand the difference between them and informal readings groups or writing groups.

FARJ: We act in the social movements through our fronts. The Urban Social Movements Front acts principally in the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Desempregados - Pela Base (Unemployed Workers Movement - from the Grassroots), which is a movement composed of the unemployed, under-employed and all those that suffer the consequences of the capitalist mode of organisation in some way. The MTD-RJ Pela Base organises around the needs of the communities and neighbourhoods in which it is inserted. Actually we can count some nuclei, in their majority inserted in favelas (townships/ shanty towns) and periphery communities in Rio de Janeiro. In the nucleus of Monkey’s Complex (Complexo dos Macacos - a favela in Rio de Janeiro) we work, essentially, with popular education; we are involved in the organisation of a pre-vestibular, which is a course made for students who cannot pay the high costs of private courses to enable them to prepare for the entrance exams for state universities. This nucleus, which is located inside the Centre of Social Culture (Centro de Cultura Social), also does the work of reusing clothes and scraps, which is organised by a comrade that used to live in an occupation that was an MTD-RJ nucleus and was evicted about one and a half years ago. The nucleus from the Penha complex works primarily with the cultural question, specifically hip-hop. There are other pre-vestibulars located in the Maré complex, in which members of the MTD-RJ Pela Base are involved working as teachers. And, outside of the city of Rio de Janeiro, we have a nucleus in the city of Petrópolis, a highlands region of the state of Rio de Janeiro; this nucleus is working with the question of transport and with that of informal work. There are many things to be done, the nuclei are being consolidated. The most important is that the MTD-RJ Pela Base manages to group together diverse comrades, whose principal horizon is anti-capitalism and the organisation of movements always from the grassroots, searching for complete autonomy from governments, parties and companies.

To a lessor degree, the Urban Social Movements Front also acts in the Academic Centre of History (Centro Acadêmico de História) at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, by means of a student comrade. To create a relationship between the student movement and the popular movements seems indispensable to any project of social transformation, although we know that is is not easy work.

Our Community Front is responsible for the organisation of the Centro de Cultura Social (CCS-RJ), which is located in the neighbourhood of Vila Isabel and primarily takes care of the community of Morro dos Macacos. Inside the CCS there are various groups and projects. Literature and cinema workshops with the children and adolescents from Morro dos Macacos, a pre-vestibular as mentioned above, which is the joint work of three groups (MTD-RJ Pela Base, CCS and Luz do Sol), environmental education and material recycling/reuse workshops, sale of used clothes at popular prices for the community, computer science courses and, at last, the Fabio Luz Social Library (Biblioteca Social Fábio Luz).

Actually we are working as teachers and supporters in the space’s pre-vestibular, which serves primarily the surrounding community, in the organisation of the Fabio Luz Social Library (that has an archive that goes from anarchism to literature, philosophy and scholarly books) and in the literature and cinema workshops with the youth of the community. The Marques da Costa Research Nucleus (Núcleo de Pesquisas Marques da Costa) also works in the CCS, and is responsible for producing articles and research about the history of the labour and anarchist movements in Rio de Janeiro, where we also edit a newsletter called 'Emecé', uniting similar researchers. The primary function of the CCS is not just to become a reference for the social movements of Rio de Janeiro, but to open the doors to autonomous initiatives and contribute to the political and social training of the community around it. The CCS is modestly fulfilling these objectives.

Our last and most recent front, called Anarchism and Nature, or agro-ecology, was created from specific work developed primarily in Seropédica (a rural city of Rio de Janeiro) and in Baixada Fluminense, and from the work of those militants in the Germinal Health and Food Nucleus (Núcleo de Saúde e Alimentação Germinal), which for a few years organised activities in the Social Culture Centre (CCS-RJ), also supporting community activities linked to the homeless and urban farmers movement.

What started with the involvement of our militants in agro-ecological groups from the region (Ecological Agriculture Group - GAE and Association of Autonomous Producers from the City and the Fields - APAC), resulted in the involvement of the front in encampments of the MST (Landless Peoples Movement - Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra) and with small farmers from the region. The front also integrates, by means of the movements in which it is inserted, the Articulation of Rio de Janeiro Agroecology (Articulação de Agroecologia do Rio de janeiro - AARJ), which is a network of diverse rural social groups and movements from the state of Rio de Janeiro that struggle primarily against the expansion of agribusiness, of transgenetics and for the strengthening of agro-ecological initiatives. We understand that agro-ecology can only become an alternative to break with capitalism, when connected to movements that struggle for land and for the control of production in the fields from the perspective of direct action.

- T.L.: In what projects is the Occupations Front involved and what are its activities?

FARJ: This front is involved in working with urban occupations, which in Brazil have a character a little different from other places in the world. Here the occupations are made by poor people, who are suffering from police violence and/or drug trafficking in the slums or are even living under bridges and on the street, a situation very common in the major Brazilian centers. Families that do not have a place to live end up occupying spaces that are not being used, giving them a social purpose. Today, this front works with five urban occupations, the result of work that has existed since 2003 - in a more organised way and as front of the organisation - since we already had experience working in urban occupations by the end of the 1990s. We were organising within the Internationalist Front of the Homeless (Frente Internacionalista dos Sem Teto - FIST), which we create with other companions and which came to have 11 occupations. However, we recently left FIST and we are now working directly (FARJ-occupation) with those occupations that were more receptive to libertarian ideas and practices. We gained a lot of recognition in this work, both as occupations and as social movements in Rio de Janeiro. For this work, we have a daily involvement in the occupations (some of them have/ had militants of the organisation who are residents); we work with assistance on the part of organisation; and, in assemblies, we encourage self-organisation, direct action, direct democracy, etc. We also seek to connect the occupations with the other social movements in Rio de Janeiro. We have relations with the Popular Council (co-ordination of social movements); participated in the 2007 occupation of the National Petroleum Agency (Agência Nacional do Petróleo - ANP) with other social movements and we have militants in contact with the Movement of Landless Rural Workers (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra - MST), including one of them giving training courses in the Florestan Fernandes school (in São Paulo state) and also here in Rio de Janeiro. To meet an important demand, we headed a "transversal" project, in which all fronts operated, called the Popular University. This proposal is deployed, in fact, as an initiative of anti-capitalist popular education focused on the transformation of society, having as a tactic political training within the popular movements.

FARJ: It is responsible for the management of our Fabio Luz Social Library (BSFL), which has existed since 2001 and has more than 1000 books on anarchism and many others of varied themes. There is a very large archive of contemporary anarchist publications from around the world. This front is also responsible for the management of the Centre of Social Culture of Rio de Janeiro (RJ-CCS), an open social space that we maintain in the area north of the city and that hosts a number of activities: recycling work that is done by a companion that produces chairs, sofas, objects of art, etc. with objects collected from the garbage; strengthening education and preparation for entry into university, done for needy youngsters in the community of the Morro dos Mocacos, theatre workshops, cultural events, celebrations and meetings of various kinds. Under the BSFL functions the Marques da Costa Research Nucleus (Núcleo de Pesquisa Marques da Costa - NPMC) that, founded in 2004, aims to produce theory for the organisation in addition to researching the history of anarchism in Rio de Janeiro. We also have a "public body" that is CELIP, which is not very active at the moment, but that is intended to hold lectures and discussions to bring new interest to anarchism.

- T.L.: I know that the Agro-ecological Front is new, but could you talk a little bit about your activities?

FARJ: Our latest front was formed from the Germinal Center for Food and Health, established in 2005. Germinal is a self-run group, concerned with issues of food and ecology, which aims to support existing experiences of agriculture and stimulate the emergence of new ones, always from a libertarian perspective. To do so, it structures itself around the area Ay Carmela! and the Pedagogical Workshops, acting in the consolidation and rescue of agriculture, agro-ecology, social ecology, eco-literacy and economic solidarity, focusing these on workers, militants of the social movements and students. It also organises vegetarian lunches (Almoços Dançantes Vegetarianos), which occur periodically at the CCS-RJ. Constituting itself as our third front, it now seeks to define its activities of priority, areas of insertion etc. We hope to have new and good results with the creation of this new front.

- T.L.: Are there any projects of FARJ itself which do not relate specifically to any front?

FARJ: There are issues that concern the whole organisation, such as publications. We edit the journal Libera; the magazine Protesta! (together with our companions of Terra Livre Anarchist Collective from Sao Paulo) and books like Social Anarchism by Frank Mintz, Anarchism Today by the Rhone-Alps Regional Union and Ricardo Flores Magón by Diego Abad de Santillán. We are doing the internal work of theoretical leveling and preparation of militants with regard to training. We are also reworking our external relations. Finally, there are many things.

With that same goal of seeking social integration in places where the contradictions of capitalism are stronger and also trying to restore the social vector lost by anarchists, we still in 2003, we contacted some urban occupations by motion made homeless in Rio . The first of these occupations that had contact Vila was the occupation of the Conquest. Sometimes visited the site and identified the possibility of developing an interesting work there, mainly out of frustration of residents in relation to party politics, the result of previous experiences without much success. The occupation of the Conquest Village is located in the neighborhood of Curicica, west of Rio de Janeiro, and has 80 families. Just next to the Town of Conquest is the occupation Nelson Faria Marine, who joined the first, merged, going to organize together. As the occupation Nelson Faria Marine has 80 other families, the "complex" of the two occupations has around 160 families who have won in court the ground in a lawsuit against the City Hall, still in 2005. From the junction between the work which had begun with the occupation Vila da Conquista and the work that was happening, the activities with the occupations began to evolve. At this point, the contacts with a former lawyer who worked for years with the social movement and had already had experience with militant anarchists - enable a more articulated, with a legal, point to what the future foundation of the Internationalist Front Homeless (FIST). Started working with the occupation Benário Olga, also in the west of the city in the neighborhood of Campo Grande, 100 households, and also with the occupation Alves, located in São Gonçalo, with 10 families. Then we started working with the occupation (since evicted), Poet Xynayba in Tijuca. Upon discharge, the occupation was about 40 families, with the vast majority of the occupants had arrived in the last three years, including two militants FARJ, a future militant and also for some time one of our support that performs work with recycling, known as Birimbau. The process responsible for the eviction was aware of the eviction of only five houses, and the village has 40. One resident reported "The village comprises 40 houses, one of the community center, with over 40 families, full of children and the elderly. The choke was great, but resisted. "In a coordinated action between the power" public ", police and family Pareto, on April 3, 2007, in the early morning, the police arrived and the family owners for the vacancy, even against court ruling that had granted an injunction against the eviction of all households in the village. There was resistance from residents and also according to the report of residents: "The police tried to shut the gate, but barramos. Now began the rubber bullets, tear gas and pepper gas. A hook of a tractor overturn the gate, but we were able to handle. Police tried to enter from the sides, but we push. "After that there was a negotiation of the police who set out to accomplish what he said the warrant and enter only to vacate the five open houses ... When the police entered and vacated, in addition to five homes, all other threatening all residents with firearms, "began the section of the foot in the door in his face and arms." Although lawyers have obtained a preliminary injunction FIST 12.30, did not stop the eviction, and the judge, who had given the injunction, an hour later suspended. The eviction took place and the residents had to seek asylum in other occupations, among them the Confederation Tamoios. It is the sad story of a resident who lived there for over two years, when he wrote: "Henceforward, the crying and the tears in contaminated quite. I, who lived nearly two years ago, has felt the weight of irreparable violence and impending loss. " Lamented for what happened, "the memories of our parties, the effort to build the community center, the friendship of neighbors and especially the love that I had children there, very hurt." Let's go back to 2005. This year, two other anarchist groups have shown interest in social work in occupations, and is now the Libertarian Activist Collective of Volunteer Studies (CLAVE) and Libertarian Action Group (LAG) form, together with us to coordinate anarchist social work occupations. This "front insert" call would Coordination of Anarchist Groups (CGA), an outline of what the future would be ahead of the FARJ occupations, because, with the future dissolution of the groups mentioned, some of its members would integrate our organization . In the same year of 2005 we founded FIST, who graduated from a tripod consisting of FARJ, without the League of Communists Party (LCSP) and the occupations already held a joint work: Town of Conquest / Nelson Faria Marine, Olga Benário , Alves and Poet Xynayba. At that time, FIST was defined "as a social-political movement, dedicated to the mutual support between the occupations of homeless in Rio de Janeiro, denounced the bourgeois estate holding and organizing resistance against any kind of exploitation and oppression, arising the capitalist system. " Chosen also based on horizontal, direct action, social and political autonomy, collective responsibility, classism, mutual support, internationalism with a view to the defense of a society and federated self-governing. These basic principles have been established so that it could be the battle front, and from it, mobilizations, aimed primarily solidarity and mutual support, all with the goal of enhancing organizational outcomes from the front. During the time we were in the FIST, defended the view that its main function should be to articulate the occupations to strengthen the bonds of solidarity, spreading the concept of social freedom Bakuninist. The fight is thought to be a collective manner, seeking this freedom conference. We also encourage the association, aiming to increase social force in the fight, as we believe, linked by ties of brotherhood and mutual support occupations have much more strength to fight against their oppressors. The legal advice given by the LCSP to occupations, has always had a fundamental place. Without legal support, any work with the occupation would be much more difficult, however, our position, while we were inside the FIST has always been that the legal support, as well as short-term gains should not overlap the political work, returned to long-term goals. Since the founding of FIST, we always care to sustain a political discussion, releasing the short-term objectives, which are naturally brought the movement to demand, which means defending the view that the social movement is not just for yourself and is necessary to defend a long-term political project that goes beyond the immediate achievements. Our contact with the occupations always occurs in both directions. The first, when their own occupations are aware of our work and call us to know them, as with a previous interest in establishing a working relationship. The second, when the very FARJ demand occupations, offering sympathy and support in the fight. So at the time worked FIST and works well today. Whether the demand or occupancy is sought at first contact with presents and discusses the principles and collective form of work, coming to terms with the occupants. With that, the fight together can be initiated. From this first moment, the occupations are encouraged to establish regular meetings horizontal. Our work in occupations occurs primarily in the articulation work to fight, help in time to get the unions resources, monitoring the activities of the occupations, participation in general meetings, and often taking part in their day-to-day and as appearing at times of celebrations, parties. Moreover, we develop educational activities and / or play with the locals. There have been various projects as the work of gardens, quoted above, recycling, walking with children, films, among others. Another important experience, even in 2005, happened when we decided that participaríamos actively in the creation of an urban occupation. This experiment, reported in some detail in the article "A Short Reading Occupation 'Quilombo of Warriors." Always with major presence of members of FARJ of LAG CLAVE and, together with LCSP. The occupation took place at dawn on 13 to November 14, 2005, between 3:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. in the morning, and survived, despite heavy police repression, until the next evening, when he was forcibly evicted. The arrest of lawyer FIST contribute to the failure of the occupation, plus the great repression that followed. We conclude the article with a reflection on what happened: "In the tactical and the FARJ FIST were aimed, by participating in this occupation, not only establish, by a violent action against the property, an enclave of social justice, albeit within the broader context of inequality we are experiencing. The activists of these organizations believed that it was an important step toward a more consistent policy of support groups, not excepting where the establishment of family ties and trust, with a view to unity in the fight. " In 2006, begins the work with the residents of four houses the Benjamin Constant Institute situated in Urca, south of the Rio In the same year, the activities begin with the occupation Domingos Passos, who has a name that pays homage to this great militant Brazilian anarchist - called "The Brazilian Bakunin" by our peers. The occupation is located in the neighborhood of Sampaio, in the north of the city and has 24 families. The next occupation to have contact with us was the Confederation of Tamoios (recently dumped), located in Largo's Apothecary, a prime area of ​​the southern area of ​​the city, in Cosme Velho district, and 22 families who had lived in an old mansion of the owner of Mail Morning. All of these occupations were integrated into the FIST, as in mid-2007, Alipio de Freitas occupation, which is next to the old DOPS, in the city center, with approximately 40 families, Lima Barreto occupation, better known as House of Artists (Art Reference Center Street) - which have also recently been dumped - located at Rua Marrecas in Lapa, which had about 15 people, the occupation José Oiticica, also honoring this great anarchistic Rio, which is in the center and has 20 families. Honoring the former Poet Xynayba occupation comes the Poet Xynayba II, Flag Square and six families, with only three participating FIST. It is also a member of FIST, even today, the occupation Flavio Bertoluzzi of Teresopolis, which has won maintaining possession of the site. However, not all flowers. Like any social work, there are a number of problems that complicate the activities and goals of FARJ, but we struggle day to day against all of them, such as drug trafficking and militias. Likewise Work involvement with the churches, which diminish the will and try to harness the social movement to charismatic leaders or politicians, putting people in a position of subservience. Also the parties 'left', which at all times close to equip social movements. Not to mention the repression itself and the constant threats suffered by the occupants. For one of our members "It is essential that residents are aware of their role as social fighters and not mere citizens on the margins of capitalism and seeking to integrate, and therefore must reject everything that weakens the fight, drug trafficking, and authoritarian parties church are in it. Another factor that hinders the activities is the authoritarian logic that most people carries within itself, reproducing attitudes in their daily living. The role of the anarchist organization is precisely these outbreaks of fighting authoritarianism and show another form of social organization is possible. It is natural that in social work this will happen and you should not use this argument to escape the fighting. " The FIST published five issues of the journal Space Occupations, aiming to "enlighten and inform individuals interested in the struggle of the homeless." How often these people do not have information on the squatting movement in Rio, the space of Occupations has established itself as a vehicle of such a movement, also with the "goal of making it a vehicle for internal communication of all occupations make up the FIST. " As already mentioned, there has always been a struggle within the fraternal FIST so it does not become simply a body of legal support and assistance of short-term social movements. For this reason, recently, FARJ separated from FIST, so he could continue the activities with the occupations, however, focus more political work, which is believed to be limited by how things were going in FIST . In an article entitled "Our Work and Occupations with the FIST" justify so our output: "There has always been a struggle within the fraternal FIST so it does not become simply a body of legal support and assistance of short-term social movements. For us, it became increasingly clear that the role played by the LCSP within the FIST, attributing too much emphasis on its legal aspects, complicating our goals was to politicize the occupation, bring long-term vision, encourage solidarity and association to fight. For us, this emphasis on law supported the idea, constantly latent in social movements, only the value of short-term gains, rather than naturally respects revolutionary, anti-capitalist, seeing the movement as a means and not an end. The emphasis was on depoliticizing legal occupations, creating leaders "messianic" - since it was no longer a lawyer, but it was the only one capable of bringing the occupation to "redemption". Instead of providing educational experiences, showing that power is explored in the people, and not outside it, these conditions encouraged the opposite. Instead of we can exert our influence by example and fight shoulder to shoulder with the exploited, the strengthening of the legal position was being used to consolidate a controlling relationship, in which the "expert", was placed on the occupations , enjoying its privilege of knowing, and stimulating the subservience of the occupants. " Today, the work somehow changed, relations with the occupations are given directly to the FARJ itself and not through the FIST. Moreover, the Front has expanded some of his work and joined the Movement of Unemployed Workers (MTD For the current Base), whose central struggle takes place in the labor issue. The space formerly larger insert that was configured only in urban occupations, extends for some slums, whose political vacuum created by the absence of left-wing groups and opportunism have eroded political parties, allows the libertarian proposals can gain more strength in these spaces. The oppression experienced before the dictatorship of capital, slaying workers generally poor and black in these realities, creates opportunities for self-organization of the inhabitants of these spaces and make anarchism a fighting tool that can give concrete answers to the capitalist barbarism.

Front Anarchism and Nature The Front Anarchism and Nature was formed in late 2007 with the aim of strengthening, supporting and developing social movements with political work that seeks to intensify the class struggle around the agro-ecology, health, nutrition, ecology, labor, herbal medicine and libertarian education. This political action is the result of cumulative experiences of our members in the social struggles fought in the middle of the organization / the exploited / as, effectively, through participation in groups such as the GAE-UFRRJ Group (Ecological Agriculture), the GECA (Group Eco-Literacy) and CELIP (Circle of Ideal Peres Libertarian Studies), support for social movements linked the struggle for agrarian and urban reform, land and an agroecological food production, especially in the proposed Social Anarchism advocated by FARJ. Our goal is to work these issues so that social movements will be self-sufficient in producing healthy foods, medicines and production inputs, and the social relations of production are established based on the principles of mutual support him, the Ecology , the classism, the self-management and federalism. We want to contribute to the formation of workers / those who opt for self-management as a model of social organization and production, together with the combative social movements, so they have a social revolution as the horizon and become an obstacle to any attempt to reform capitalism operated from their own / them. This is only possible in its fullness, destroying the capitalist society and planting libertarian socialism. As militants Front Anarchism and Nature, we integrate the Center for Food and Health Germinal, created in 2005, and Workers Cooperative in Agroecology Floreal, organized since 2008. Through the Germinal and Floreal is performed to support social movements, specifically the Movement of Unemployed Workers (MTD), the Occupations Movement and Urban Landless Movement (MST), seeking to strengthen the articulation of farmers / green known as the Joint Agroecology of Rio de Janeiro (AARJ). These are the spaces of social inclusion where we take the anarchist proposal to be discussed, considering them a fertile ground for the strengthening of relations between the mutual-support / the workers / as. We participate in public activities contrary to the development of agribusiness as the Alert Against the Green Desert and the Campaign for a Transgenic-Free Brazil and maintain relationships with Via Campesina, Movement of Small Farmers (MPA), the Movement of People Affected by Dams (MAB ) and the Movement of Rural Women (MMC). Our work is done in coordination with the other fronts of the organization through the implementation of educational policies and activities, along with rural and urban communities and rural social movements and the city. As examples, we cite the teaching of herbal medicine workshops, film shows and agroecological management of the kitchen made by CCS in Germinal Center (Centro de Cultura Social), and the conduct of training courses in agroecology and agroforestry involving the People's University Germinal Center and Cooperative Floreal, and also work to stimulate the urban gardens Occupations with the Homeless (Occupations Vila da Conquista, Poet Xynayba, April 16, among others). Therefore, we sought to establish a counterpoint to conventional agriculture and bourgeois society. These same, that favor the exploitation of workers and the nature, concentration of land in the hands of the landowners, the dependence of the financial market and the market for natural resources, seeds, fertilizers, and pesticides and the appropriation of popular historical knowledge and wealth natural. Seeking to strengthen social movements and their initiatives and raising the flag of Agroecology, followed in order to intensify the class struggle, strengthen grassroots organization and reap a society emancipated from exploitation of man and nature. Thus, we believe that we are accumulating practical, social power and knowledge not only for the FARJ and Social Anarchism, but especially to the emancipatory struggles of the exploited classes. HEALTH AND ANARCHY AGROECOLOGY!

At least as practiced by the South American especifista groups, these are organizations of anarchist militants who are active on the mass and tendency level.

If revolutionary minority organizations in our time are political-economic and the social struggle is also political-economic, what does it matter that some organizations might be duping themselves that they are strictly political? Are they even? I know the MAS theory distinguishes between the revolutionary, intermediate, and popular level. Are not all levels engaged in political-economic/social struggle?

Common Struggle - Libertarian Communist Federation is an organization of revolutionaries coming from different movements of resistance who identify with the communist tradition within anarchism. The federation's activities are organized around theoretical development, anarchist propaganda, and intervention in the struggle of our class, be it autonomously or by direct involvement in social movements.

If a tree falls and there isn't a communique written about it on AnarchistNews.org or a workers' inquiry on Libcom.org, did it still fall?

As I said before, I wish Collective Action best of luck with their endeavours. However, the tone of some of the comments about looking at various theories and trying to come up with the right organising model seems to be similar to what L&S people were saying when they started. And to me it seems a bit based on a quite naive idea that if you just think about it hard enough and come up with the right ideas then somehow everything will fall into place and your organisation will be amazing.

However, I think the crux of the problem is that we are all groups of handfuls of people, who ultimately have almost zero influence in the wider class as a whole. So no matter how good our ideas are, ultimately we are just treading water much of the time…

Anyway, onto a more specific point, I meant to comment on this in the previous Collective Action post on here, but didn't get round to it:

for us, we are not sure whether it is even worth attempting, since the actual struggles that the anti-austerity movement is involved in are struggles for a minority, a privileged section of the working class, whose conditions do not speak to the marginalised majority, who in recent months have actually demonstrated a willingness to build a counter power – look at the August riots.

Now, this and the similar comment in the previous article quite angered me. In this case in particular that is more something worthy of the Daily Mail than supposedly revolutionary anarchist communists! (At least with respect to its comment on public sector workers, not the riots)

I shouldn't need to, but I will explain why: - the biggest element of the anti-austerity struggles so far has been the public sector strikes over pensions - 7 million people are in receipt of public sector pensions - 20 million people are dependents on public sector pensions (i.e. in households which benefit from them) - one key element of the strikes was against the change in uprating of pensions from RPI to the lower CPI - this change affects all pensions, in the public sector, in the private sector and the state pension - i.e. it affects everyone - even looking at just public sector workers, we are disproportionately female and part-time - the average pension fund local government workers is just £4800 per year (around £3000 or less for women) - calling people "privileged" who mostly earn well under an average wage is nonsensical - comparing a struggle of a few million predominantly female workers of all ages and a few thousand mostly young male, unemployed workers isn't worthwhile - and if you do make this comparison, it is ridiculous to call the latter more representative of the "marginalised majority".

From the type of comments Collective Action have made about the recent strikes it seems to me unlikely that any of them have actually been involved in them. I mean they can feel free to correct me if I'm wrong but the type of talk here seems similar again to the L&S-style talk of class struggle as something you can try and organise like a game of Risk, where we can focus strategically on certain areas and try to win points or something. As opposed to the reality which is much more gritty and uncertain - that class struggle is everywhere and it is our role is to engage in it where it involves our daily lives.

class struggle as something you can try and organise like a game of Risk, where we can focus strategically on certain areas and try to win points or something.

Well put Steven. Meanwhile, CA have just lost Kamchatka and Yakutsk ;)

"Our emphasis on the stratification of working life in this country comes exactly from this aim. It is an attempt to recognise the current nature of class composition and how to organise effectively around it. It’s necessary to actually define what it means to be losing and winning. What are these workers losing and what do they aim to win? In respect to public sector workers this particular section of the working class who, admittedly, have accelerated resistance against austerity, have done so in the context of defending their positions as non-precarious, contracted and pensioned workers, who simply wish to maintain those positions. They aim to win secure pensions, keep their jobs and their salaries. These defensive demands have seen the formation of traditional left and trade unionist campaigns to “win” or defend themselves, not against austerity per se, but simply against austerity within the public sector most affected. These campaigns have failed to generalise resistance or make it aggressive, because they have taken on a dynamic of focusing solely on public sector cuts rather than on austerity generally as a social problem for all workers. They have refused to take a more militant stance against these measures, relying on conciliatory models of protest despite the rhetoric of the Trade Unions Congress.

In our May Day statement we assert that, "ultimately the objective of an autonomous and self-organising workers’ movement is to build unity” (our later emphasis). However we also declare that, “such an aspiration ... should not lead us to ignore both the conservative and privileged nature of certain sections of the workers’ movement as significant barriers to this goal”. Our meaning is that building a genuinely inclusive struggle against austerity is about acknowledging difference and building unity through it.

The point is that unorganised, private-sector workers are a majority of the working class and represent the dominant experience of working life. This is while anti-cuts groups and especially trade unions are tailoring their activity to the defensive struggles of workers in the public sector. This isn't arguing for an exclusive approach to organising, but an acknowledgement of how sectoral and defensive struggles say very little to the majority of workers in this country. What is lacking is a theoretical investigation on how the anti-authoritarian/left libertarian movement fits within the framework established by anti-cuts group. At present the common practice appears merely to be handing out propaganda and attempting well intended but negligible interventions."

The point is that unorganised, private-sector workers are a majority of the working class and represent the dominant experience of working life. This is while anti-cuts groups and especially trade unions are tailoring their activity to the defensive struggles of workers in the public sector.

1) Protection of public services doesn't only affect the workers in those industries. Sure privatization will be shit for NHS workers, but you don't think it's also going to be shit for the 10s of millions of private sector workers who rely on it for their healthcare?

I don't want to be dramatic, but this privileged public sector trade unions v. no-unionized private sector workers really is sounding Daily Mail-ish. Not to mention that the two bounce off each other. Public sector workers are told their pensions have to switch to career average because that's what the private sector has. Then, the private sector turns around and says, 'well if the public sector can't afford final payment pension schemes, how can you expect us to'?

The divide between public and private and worker and user is much less stark than this analysis seems to suggest.

2) As anarchists who want to be practically involved with the class, we either organize struggles outside the trade unions/in the private sector (SF tries to do this on a small, winnable scale) or we support struggles as they come. (Probably worth noting here that, at least in London, SF was very active in supporting the private sector Sparks dispute.)

I think it would be fucking awesome if CA finds a way to catalyze mass struggles in the retail and service sector, for example. But in the absence of that, it makes sense that we're going to support struggles as they come up. That shouldn't be the end-all be-all of our activity (in fact, in SF we've had discussions about not letting ourselves get sucked up into trade union/leftist cycle of marches and one-day strikes), but in the absence of initiating our own struggles it seems a bit like sideline sniping to offer such a shallow criticism of anarchists being involved in supporting, ya know, the biggest strike in the past 70 years (albeit with all the trade union shortcomings that came with it).

3) I still think you're viewing anarchists as outsiders. I work in the public sector and I organized (with some success and the support of SF) outside of the trade union in my workplace. Really, regardless of our sector, anarchists shouldn't be focusing on 'interventions' but on our own, practical workplace activity.

Really, regardless of our sector, anarchists shouldn't be focusing on 'interventions' but on our own, practical workplace activity.

perfectly said;) although i guess many anarchists would say you are wrong and should rather say "anarchosyndicalists" not "anarchists".

as for CA, i am curious what they will produce let's say a year from today. meaning an evaluation of their practical activities or something like that which would make a practical sense and allow me to really understand what they are about. because now i see words on internet and something like a debate circle. which can be a great start, but time will tell.

What does a political-economic organization actually do, if in a struggle it is the worker committee or mass assembly or 'workmates council" open to all workers that is the organizing body and has political discussions?

And isn't the political-economic organization encouraging and participating within such bodies, an intervention? Or does all the organizing and discussion happen within the political-economic organization more like revolutionary syndicalism a la more traditional IWW?

we don't want SolFed to be an organ of struggle but an organ of agitation rooted in workplaces and communities

So it is more like unionen, fighting organization of consciously communist workers, who agitate for more open organs of struggle...but again that just sounds fairly agitational/interventionist...even if SolFed is doing good things like training their members and other militant workers, doing solnet like work, etc.

Sab, that might be a discussion for another thread and, I think, there's been a few other threads that have really hashed out the idea of what political-economic means, although I'm too lazy to look them up right now.
