---
title: "Review Full Circle Life Rebellion Ben Morea"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/review-full-circle-life-rebellion-ben-morea"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A review of a book by Ben Morea (formerly of Black Mask and Up Against The Wall Motherfucker). By Dan of The Unseen Book Club Podcast and published in Heatwave magazine issue 2."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

A review of a book by Ben Morea (formerly of Black Mask and Up Against The Wall Motherfucker). By Dan of The Unseen Book Club Podcast and published in Heatwave magazine issue 2. Ben Morea, for those who have encountered him in New York City in recent years, appears as a figure out of place and time. In his mid 80’s, with a handlebar mustache, cowboy hat, snakeskin boots, and bolo tie, he looks like an aged outlaw biker. Known (and mythologized) as an anarchist tactician, counterculture luminary, painter and graphic designer, propagandist and psychedelic militant, Morea was born in 1941 and raised amid jazz and heroin in Harlem. In the 1960s, he turned toward avant-garde art and revolutionary politics, co-founding the print magazine Black Mask and the anarchist group Up Against the Wall Motherfucker. By the end of the decade, he went underground, disappearing into the Southern Rockies and living off-grid for forty years, eventually immersing himself in ceremonial practice with indigenous communities. He returned to New York in his 70’s to share his experiences and insights. That narrative sketches the contours of a truly unique life. But to grasp its textures, this story should be traced and retraced carefully. Full Circle guides us well. The book is an extended interview with Morea, drawing from over a dozen conversations spanning several seasons beginning in 2020. These were painstakingly edited by 1000 Voices Collective members Ariel Uesseler and Sabu Kohso in intimate collaboration with Ben Morea himself. Full Circle presents the full spectrum of Morea’s uncompromising commitment to revolutionary existence. It is full of stories that are alternately inspiring, bewildering, and at times (and by his own admission) nearly unbelievable. Notable incidents include: breaking into the Pentagon; getting expelled from the Situationist International; encounters with Thelonious Monk, H. Rap Brown, Valerie Solanas and Ken Kesey; housing runaway youth in flats paid for by acid and pot sales; eating the still-beating heart of a deer. Such adventures are compelling, but also provide a deep well of insightful thoughts on the relationship between art and politics; theories of organization, freedom and autonomy; and relationships outside the bounds of white-settler supremacy and the nuclear family. Woven into every aspect of Full Circle is Morea’s spiritual wisdom, honed through decades of ceremonial life. And it’s these teachings that distinguish Full Circle , and Ben Morea, as an important voice. Morea is explicit about what he chooses to communicate about this major period of his life. And slowly I began to articulate what I did, and what I learned during those forty years, that would not pose a threat to where I went. I formulated a conversation around general terms. Like animism. Where I came from, the people were animists. But I didn’t want to identify those people. They had made room for me in their world. In no way would I expose it. But animism is an understanding, I saw it could be introduced. 1 Morea’s animism resonates with the teachings of the Buddha, the enlightenment theology of Spinoza, and even with dialectical materialism. But Morea dismisses the impulse to reduce these insights to theory: I think your idea is a little similar to Buddhism. I would go the opposite: Buddhism is similar to it. Animism came first. Animism was the original understanding of man. It wasn’t just a thought, it was a way of being… You don’t have to talk about it. The fact that you are alive, you are carrying that energy with, so are part of creation. 2 This insistence on interconnectedness and immanence permeates his thinking, and is inseparable from his discussion of revolution and politics. So striving to live is a sort of resistance? Yes, it’s a resistance. Resisting the death that’s before it. And that’s what our generation, our culture, our consciousness should be. The will to live. 3 My idea was always ‘something has to be done.’ We’re not tryin…
