---
title: "Education Duty Junge Linke"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/education-duty-junge-linke"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "In the wake of the wave of student protests and occupations over the increase in tuition fees, cuts to education funding and abolition of EMA, Junge Linke look at the role of education and the contradictions within the struggles."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/education-duty-junge-linke)

In the wake of the wave of student protests and occupations over the increase in tuition fees, cuts to education funding and abolition of EMA, Junge Linke look at the role of education and the contradictions within the struggles.

The 2010 movement against education cuts in Britain presents itself as composed of at least two tendencies. On the one hand, there are voices which seem to soberly defend their quality of life against an attack by the government, making little attempt to disguise their materialism for something else. 1 Confronted with the prospect of a £9,000 annual tuition fee they seem to realise that they cannot afford it or would rather spend it on something else if possible. They seem to realise that their own interest in education is secondary to other goals in this society and express anger about it; however powerless their actions might seem.

On the other hand, there are voices which appear to be very concerned about education cuts damaging society, transparent and fair implementation of cuts and not to ‘obstruct students or staff in any way’. 2 They advise the government that it is making a mistake 3 , that education is a right 4 and that `our’ problems could be solved without overly harming higher education – for instance by taxing tax-avoiding companies. Taken seriously, it is not their blunt materialist interest which drives these protesters to the streets. It is rather their concern for the values of this society in which their access to education is denied more and more, i.e. which values their interests little. 5

Obviously, the two approaches have a common denominator. Both tendencies are the first big response to the cuts across the board in the UK. In fact, the general public and the authorities seem genuinely surprised by the advent of this movement, puzzled about how strongly people are opposing these cuts on the streets. 6 The Metropolitan Police even predicts a new era of riots after a fire extinguisher didn’t hit anybody 7 and an old police van was rattled. What a large part of the published opinion in this country finds puzzling is the extent to which people expressed their anger openly about a restriction of their basic life needs.

Immediately, these cuts mean that people have less money in their pockets and thus have less access to the stuff they need. But these cuts also mean that more people will find it harder to even pursue a university degree. This limits their potential earnings in the future – however uncertain those are to begin with. A university degree allows one to earn a decent salary if and only if one finds an employer in need for one’s services after graduation. 8 The possible material perks of education can only be collected if that education benefits a company’s business. This is a first hint that the state does not (and did not in the past) provide education as a service to its citizens but for a different purpose.

That the state has a strong interest in basic education of its subjects is pretty evident. The state even mandates that children are educated: education is a duty. 9 Compulsory school education was introduced in the late 19th century in the UK mainly for two reasons. First, in order to prevent capitalists and parents from ruining young workers so fundamentally that they are unemployable when they reach adult age. Second, in order to satisfy the demand of companies for skilled workers.

While companies have an interest in using trained workers they do not have an immediate interest in training them – training workers might be a means but is not an ends. The investment necessary for teaching young workers to read, write and calculate does not pay off especially in a society with a free labour market. Furthermore, when companies do train their own employees they have no interest in teaching them general knowledge as such. Their interest is only to provide them with the skills immediately relevant to their job.

Thus, the state provides free school education for every citizen in order to produce a workforce with a general knowledge applicable to a variety of jobs. 10 This way the state also gets to teach its young citizens about the benefits of being dominated. Both educational goals are laid out in the `National Curriculum'. 11

Technical skills are a requirement for any worker. Basic Mathematics is central for understanding a wide range of issues relevant to business and bureaucracy; without the basic knowledge such as simple arithmetic operations with rational numbers most office and many blue collar jobs could not be performed. 13 Science allows for a better understanding of nature and prepares the student for understanding production processes. Geography teaches how local, national and global production and reproduction processes in nature and human society interact. In Design & Technology students are specifically introduced to research processes, they learn to design products and relevant practical skills for possible future jobs. 14 Information & Communication Technology teaches to interact with computers such that students are capable of performing the basic tasks almost all companies require from their employees these days. 15 Command of the English language allows students to become able citizens and employable workers since it allows them to interact in spoken and in written form – reading manuals, writing reports etc. 16 Modern Foreign Languages provides the student with the skill of conducting business with people who speak different languages.

Yet, technical skills do not suffice in this economy. The state does not command workers to work in a particular company but they are free to pursue their own happiness on the labour market. In fact, they have to. The state simply sets the rules, excludes everybody from the means of living through private property, and then allows everybody to find employment, i.e. to sell his own skin at a price such that it is profitable for a company. 17 Workers must show initiative both when looking for a job and quite often on the job. This economy needs individuals who can on the one hand critically assess their skills and who can on the other hand deal with the inevitable setbacks produced by universal competition: if everybody competes, there simply must be losers and those losers are also expected to get up on their feet after each defeat. Music 18 and Art & Design 19 are subjects which are quite explicitly focused on developing this kind of personality. Physical Education teaches kids the constant need for self-improvement. Also, being healthy is an advantage on the labour market.

But the state does not only provide school education to produce able workers. It is also interested in loyal subjects. Students are provided with the fitting ideology in their Citizenship classes. They learn to appreciate their rights, learn about their duties and to pursue their interests according to the rules the state sets. 20 History teaches students to identify with the nation by providing material for this identification. 21 Students are also taught to appreciate the English heritage, to develop national pride. Modern Foreign Languages serves the same purpose and teaches students to distinguish between their and other cultures and to identify with ‘their own’. 22 Geography provides further material for this identification and also provides the basic information and appreciation needed to follow world politics. 23

Schools also contribute to the formation of modern democratic subjects by their mere form. Compulsory school education forces children to be at certain places for certain times and to direct their attention towards a topic picked by someone else. The school form teaches subordination. It teaches acceptance of the rules set by the state and that punishment is meted out if those rules are broken. It teaches to accept that others may dispose over one’s time, whether it be the state or an employer with whom one signs a contract. Yet, schools are not lawless places, children are not completely subject to the arbitrariness of their teachers; the teacher only confronts children as an agent of the state. Through the limited power of their teachers students learn that at the end of the day, authority does not rest with the personnel but with the state, its rules and regulations. But even these rules and regulations are not arbitrary. They are designed to enable students to learn the kind of qualifications necessary to survive in the ‘real world’ and to become the kind of subjects the state needs. If certain practices turn out to be counter-productive for this end, they may be dropped. 24 Since students do learn the skills necessary to pursue their own competitive interests, school appears like a service to them. Their will is broken in their own interest – as the agents of the state (teachers, principals and social workers) do not get tired pointing out. The message of this is that schools, like any other institution of the state, is not just domination but just domination, not merely but fair. This way the school form is a successful contribution to the production of the kind of subjects a democratic state demands: subjects who insist that domination over them is a service to them. 25

The economy does not only need common workers, but also workers employable in higher positions, positions in management or performing more complicated tasks. Schools separate those ‘suitable’ for higher jobs and those heading for the minimum wage jobs at best. The school system has a double task: education and selection. The task of selection stands in conflict with the task of education. For instance, education or knowledge transfer is not merely measured by its success. Somebody who does not get long division is not given the time and peace to learn it, perhaps even a reason why they should care. 26 The pace is not determined by those who ought to learn the material. If education was the sole purpose of the school system, those having most trouble learning would be given the most time to learn. Yet, in this society ‘good’ students get to spend more time in school than their peers.

Through regular tests and grades a hierarchy of students is produced which prepares the way for a hierarchy of jobs. Contrary to feudal times the social hierarchy in a bourgeois society shall not be determined by heritage or favours but instead by skill and toil. This way, a just selection of the elites ought to be accomplished: the ‘smart’ people get the best jobs and those stuck with minimum wage can take solitude in knowing that they tried their best; at least they got equal opportunity, right? 27

Yes and no. Selecting people according to their performance at tests might contribute to but does not ensure a performance based hierarchy. ‘Smart’ kids from poorer backgrounds have it much harder to excel at these tests due to lack of financial resources and peace to conduct their studies. In order to offset this disadvantage the Education Maintenance Allowance (EMA) was introduced which throws students from poorer backgrounds some breadcrumbs (up to a generous £30 a week!) to ease their financial worries. The current government decided that this investment was not worth the price, i.e. that the recruitment of the elite can easily take place without it. Of course, the government could in principle be making a mistake. But when protesters advise the same government that pushes through these measures, they conceal the purpose of the EMA and how ridiculously low it was to begin with.

While for the higher sort of education the state’s educational goals do not change much, it does not rely on direct command. 28 Since the state does not need everybody to receive higher education, it relies on a speculation by its young citizens: “If I invest 3-4 years of my life and enough money for study fees and supporting myself, then I might be able to find a company which requires my services. In that case, I can then use my salary to pay the debt I took on to earn it.” However, this speculation – as any speculation – has an uncertain result, as students have come to realise in recent years through increasing numbers in graduate unemployment. 29 The fact that the livelihood of workers is dependent on the success of companies presents itself directly even to those pursuing a graduate career.

These unemployment numbers indicate that workers with university degrees are produced which are not needed by capital. At least too many people get degrees in the wrong kind of subjects. The proposed increase of the maximum tuition fee presents new conditions on which aspiring students must base their speculation: the price of studying something ‘useless’ becomes higher. First, because in the proposed scheme tuition fees for arts and humanities would rise more quickly since these subjects are about to loose their teaching grants. Second, the better the prospects of a job the better the chances that the ‘investment’ (the debt taken on to finance it) in one’s own education is worthwhile. 30 Earning an English Literature degree, for example, becomes less appealing since the gap between debt and possible income gets bigger.

There is no reason to doubt the government when it expresses its wish that no one should simply be turned away from universities. 31 What it wants is human material that matches the requirements of capital. This is not different from 1963 when the massification of higher education was introduced in the UK. The difference between 2010 and 1963 is that back then the state expected more students to be useful for the growth of the national economy. On the contrary, the government’s opinion in 2010 is that the burden of financing education can be placed more on those being educated, since university graduates are not deemed as critical for the national economy any more, even those who study the kind of subjects the government appreciates: mathematics and the sciences. 32

If the current trend continues we might see another student movement in a few years defending the £9,000 tuition fee caps against an ‘unjust‘ increase. Because, however grim the prospects of a good life with a university degree look, the prospects of a good life without a degree are usually much worse in this society. However bad the conditions for studying are, it is probably still worth it financially for the individual.

What is strange about the current movement is that it on the one hand demands that education is a right. Yet on the other hand it naturally accepts that food, shelter and entertainment are no. 33 We see protests against a Government decision to allow more freedom in pricing education but silence about the fact that there are prices on food, flats and fixie bikes. This is particularly puzzling since for most people the main reason to go to university is to get a job and thereby a salary in order to buy these things. Also, we see protest against education cuts but no mention of how this education sorts people into a wage hierarchy, excluding most people from the stuff they need. 34

The apparent blunt materialism expressed on the streets is not that blunt after all. It is a strangely mediated and submissive materialism. It is mediated because it demands access to university education (usually) not because it is an end in itself but only because uni is a means to get a decent salary. It is submissive because it accepts being excluded from the means of living and accepts the established rules for overcoming this exclusion: getting a university degree, getting in debt for it and finally working for some company’s wealth to pay that debt off. The idealism expressed in university occupation declarations (‘education is a right ’) and by those who suggest a redistribution of the cuts in whichever way, is ignorant of both the material reality and the purpose of education for state and capital. If those who protest against the cuts agree with the principles which produce those cuts, they invite defeat, regardless of how ‘radical’ their tactics are.
