---
title: "Russia Love Tate Modern Molotovs And More David Stuart Wise"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/russia-love-tate-modern-molotovs-and-more-david-stuart-wise"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Russia with Love /Tate Modern Molotovs / A 2018 Palme d&#039;Or prize on the back of some Icteric scruffs - Wise Twins &amp; Ron Hunt / Covid 19-84 and the possible death of a society of art veneered entertainment. Originally published on the Revolt Against Plenty website."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/russia-love-tate-modern-molotovs-and-more-david-stuart-wise)

From Russia with Love /Tate Modern Molotovs / A 2018 Palme d'Or prize on the back of some Icteric scruffs - Wise Twins & Ron Hunt / Covid 19-84 and the possible death of a society of art veneered entertainment. Originally published on the Revolt Against Plenty website.

"STORM THE REALITY STUDIOS RETAKE THE UNIVERSE" From Russia with Love / Tate Molotov Cocktails /A Palme d’Or prize in 2018 on the back of a bunch of Icteric scruffs / Covid 19-84 and the possible death throes of a society of art-veneered entertainment What follows has been hidden from history Redacted / Expunged / Recuperated .......CALL IT WHAT YOU WILL..... This polemic is about a Russian guy called Alexander Art who threw Molotov cocktails at the outside walls of London’s Tate Modern Gallery in late 2017

This polemic is about our strident intervention to help get Alexander Art out of prison banged-up by Tate Modern’s cultural authorities.

This polemic is about Alexander Art’s obsession with the early 1920s Russian avante garde artist Kasimir Malevich mirroring a somewhat similar obsession re the Icteric groupuscule in the mid to late 1960s and which was celebrated in the “Poetry Must be Made by All! Transform the World!” exhibit in Stockholm’s Moderna Museet. Nearly 3 decades later this innovative though recuperative exhibit was somewhat proclaimed in Anselm Jappe’s biography on Guy Debord.

This polemic is about a film The Square which received the Palm d’Or in Cannes, France in 2018; a film that never once acknowledged the vital source of its inspiration (i.e. The Fekkin ‘Wise Twins & Ron Hunt in Newcastle-Upon-Tyne) Instead we receive in this film an insipid, banal recasting....

Before getting down to brass tacks here perhaps it’s worth first drifting off into something like a crazy aside. In late teens both of us (the fekkin’ Wise Twins) were fascinated by the mid to late 19th century Russian novelists especially Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Apart from Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights , the English novelists seemed not to have experienced the depths of life – and death. It wasn’t so much the writing style but the many larger than life figures described by Dostoyevsky which attracted. Little did we realise it was nihilism that was the source of attraction; those individuals moving beyond good and evil unleashing the subconscious without moral restraint, unable to control themselves, men and women in dives or shifty tenements fronting dirty, cold Russian Winter streets and / or in archipelago jails…

The backdrop to all this was Whitby still at the time something of a fishing port with a local wild edge to its Dracula reputation. I was working as a carriage cleaner in the railway sidings often having along with other cleaners to hose out fish trucks packed knee deep in squirming lice then reload the vans with ice blocks and fresh fish. This meant having to occasionally visit the nearby scampi factory on the inner harbour banks and load up the trucks destined later in the day to arrive in Finsbury Park railway sidings London en route to Covent Garden market. The scampi factory was packed with women workers who were tough and I mean tough; fish girls of folk lore par excellence. They were out to intimidate with language and gesture packed with sexual innuendo just for the helluva it. They knew I was scared of them and a bit of a ‘nintullectual’ so they constantly upped the ante. Bit by bit I dreaded visiting the factory until one day I got surrounded by about 10 young gals and my clothes were more or less torn off my body. Jeez were these fish gals arms powerfully muscled! None of this was a sexual turn-on for them or me. I was simply shouting – rather screaming - that I had to get the trucks loaded otherwise I was for it and would get the sack. They laughed mockingly swearing their heads off as they knew that which was why they demonstrated their power… They could wrestle any man to the floor and I had to be utterly humiliated at all cost even if it was all a big joke done for kicks… They succeeded… and then, and then, and then, I really realised what Dostoevsky was all about….. After that studenty reverence was kinda replaced with a big ‘fuck the books’attitude, replaced with a Robert Johnson / Pinetop Smith boogie style improvisation in life..

What follows is a brief involvement with VOID magazine (published by Morbid Books) in late 2017/ early 2018 following an article we placed in Issue no 2 entitled “Welcome to Future Ecocide” which was a spin off from BIG Garbage / BIG Artwash / BIG Greenwash = BIGGER ECO-DESTRUCTION on the RAP web and also published in Benedict IWs mag in New Zealand in late 2019 and which finally morphed into Feral Wilding Subverts Suicide Capitalism .

These two texts weren’t just a simplistic ‘revolutionary’ ecology in the sense of Murray Bookchin’s statement that “Ecology is the only revolutionary science” but involved wider memories of past nature-oriented Icteric experiments in Newcastle in the mid to late 1960s or, if you like, a proposed reshaping of humanity and nature inextricably combined. To take a specific example: Icteric was also about the lost history of the Russian avant-garde at the time of the Russian Revolution and its immediate aftermath. The seminal figure of Malevich played a big part here and we were duly fascinated not only with White on White and the Black Square but also Malevich’s Suprematist coffin which we reconstructed together with a weeklong performance art ritual which ended up with one of us kicking to bits a replica painting of The Black Square . Naive yes, but we were basically fascinated by the table rasa Malevich announced as we ineluctably two years later became much more fascinated by Malevich’s comments than his artefacts. Comments like, “Come comrades swim with us into the whiteness” a prelude to prising open “anarchy’s new dawns” perhaps more tellingly situated re Anton Ciliga’s comment in The Russian Enigma written many years after Malevich’s death that the aura of Russia generally was “despotism tinged with anarchy”. However, by then we had gorged on the forbidden fruit of the Situationists and more knowingly could then situate Malevich as an interesting stepping stone en route to a much more profound critique of art and culture in general in relation to capitalism, and certainly a critique which was – and still is – much more explosive. Sadly we then noted that Malevich in his final years obviously was feeling the full force of Stalin’s despotism lapsing into real, old time cornball art products, such as self portraits, etc. as he degenerated into something like Tracy Emin’s concept of ‘stuckism’.

The die was cast and from then an increasing fascination with the failure of the Russian Revolution and European revolution in general took over swiftly surpassing all the Trotskyite spieling as “anarchy’s new dawns” lauded the often magnificent experiment that preceded the crushing of the Spanish Revolution of 1936-8. But neither would the somewhat obsessive Russian puzzle go away like that especially that emphasis on active nihilist extremism. Would it break out again, and how?

Alexandra Art belongs to a rebellious, born-again, anti art movement (among other explosive pointers) that quite quickly developed a profile in Russia a few years before Putin came to power in Russia in 2000. It’s a movement that undoubtedly bears comparison with the nihilistic rebellion around the time of the emancipation of the serfs in the 1860s, personified most tellingly at that time through Dimitry Pisarev’s totemic book, The Destruction of Aesthetics . More than that it also heralded a revolt of form which carried on expanding its scope until crushed by the brutal hand of Stalinoid social realism from the late 1920s onwards through to the banality of the Brezhnev era beginning in the mid 1950s right up to 1970s-80s Samizdat. The final stage was epitomised through the god-fearing figure of Solzhenitsyn that latter day novel writing parody of Dostoevsky with books like The First Circle and One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich . Like Dostoevsky more than a century earlier, Solzhenitsyn finally escaped the Gulag – but ironically only to end up self –imprisoning on New York’s Lower East Side in a house surrounded with barbed wire becoming a somewhat ludicrous figure then mockingly obliterated in Situationist Bruce Elwell’s New York based Midnight Notes mag in the late 1970s. Solzhenitsyn’s ‘radical’ stance however was limited to a revolt of content; an attack if you like on the mores of the pseudo-communists of the ruling Russian bureaucracy but an attack presented via traditional and outdated cultural forms, in his case the novel.

In the early 1990s in Russia, Perestroika (Openness!!) then kicked-in and the Berlin wall came crashing down followed by a period of utter chaos spreading throughout Russia as the old Communist Party nomenclature morphed –more or less – into the new oligarchy. One of the friends of this new oligarchy was none other than former KGB agent-in-chief name of Vlad (The Impaler) Putin. Then inevitably betraying his former supporters the guy became a Mafia-like boss adopting the role of Peter the Great or at least, some kind of new Tzar in a thoroughly ultra-capitalist Russia. Hardly surprising then that a new generation of radical nihilists began grabbing the rebel limelight, and how! The detonation of Pussy Riot in 2012 with all the shades of global fallout from punk rock under Malcolm McLaren’s former provocative influence hit the headlines worldwide. Truth to tell this outburst had been in preparation for a number of years.

Within this conundrum let’s now add a missing curiously meandering link: During the heyday of the Situationist International from the late 1950s to its demise in the early 1970s, there was some kind of discreet affiliation with various radical artists, émigrés from Russia’s pseudo-communist totalitarianism. These émigrés were treated with a certain amount of leniency combined with respect by SI members simply because they had gone through really tough background experiences simply because they were prepared to stand up for their beliefs. In no way were these gals and guys snowflakes. However, this leeway tended to become something of an obstacle especially the necessity of precise radical thinking that wasn’t tolerated among the SI’s West European or American counterparts. Unfortunately there doesn’t seem to be any record of what these Russians had gotten up to though you get the impression that some of these émigrés had been pretty effective provocateurs finally getting some of their edgy piss-takes onto the pages of Time Mag in the late 1960s. One especially caught the eye: a drawing of Lenin carrying a sexy semi-naked stripper in his arms; if you like porno tipping into really telling subversion! What happened to this bawdy Russian form of Dutch Provo – if you can call in that - in the next four decades, Gawwwwd alone knows!

And then something happens!!!!! Out of the blue I get contacted to help a guy in bad shit; lo and behold part of the Russian avant-garde that came to prominence after Pussy Riot put on their provocative and courageous performance in the cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow in 2012. After going into ‘things’ more we both felt we had no choice but to fully support Alexandra Art’s actions. Sure, the guy is confused (his initial naivety about Tate Modern / letters to the Queen, etc – like 19th century appeals to the Tzar, etc,) but there’s that admirable streak of daring authenticity and sheer guts – so Russian – that I’ve always admired since becoming a Dostoevsky addict at the age of 17; that indomitable Russian spirit for true human liberation and willing to go through hell and high water to get there.

I had long suspected there had been some kind of rub-off from King Mob and related material - the Newcastle Black Hand Gang – etc, especially the sheer sexualised, bog wall utter crudity used to put forward a message of liberation that decades later appealed to genuine Russian rebels combating the fearsome neo-liberal capitalism ransacking that country where the gap between rich and poor was to become the most extreme in all Europe. And for sure they’d become aware of English Punk and no doubt started making connections. For years I suspected Voina (War) - and just to say pre Pussy Riot - was acquainted especially when I realised there were old codgers in that group of largely young rebels. (Three years ago I also found out there was a Black Hand group of young Iranian women street artists putting up subversive visual messages and were always getting done in by their country’s revolutionary guard. Again this was cheering seeing that generally 98% of contemporary ubiquitous street ‘art’ world-wide is just decorative nonsense). Whatever!!!

For sure I think Alexandra is an admirer of Pyotr Pavlensky who fled recently from Russia to France where he now has set fire to a bank getting banged up in the Santé- for I don’t know how long - and is calling for a renewed French revolution! I’ve included here an attachment on Pavlensky which I find hilarious particularly that bit calling in prostitutes as witnesses in his trial. It’s like something out of a more updated Dostoevskyian account of Russian nihilists, one that takes in the theatre of the absurd bringing about endless, admirable laughter. (But then what’s that bit about Ukrainian nationalism??) Moreover, once similar individual Russian émigrés would have been in awe of ‘The West’ now not so much, or, should we say, hardly at all? Or maybe their perspectives are changing at the speed of light and are somewhat all over the shop? For sure part of Pussy Riot were taken in by western celebrity figures and cultural benefactors like Saatchi & Saatchi and the same can also be said of Pavlensky. For certain I will be most interested how Saatchi & Saatchi can recuperate these present outbursts; will they drop some of the ‘Russians’ like a ton of hot bricks?? Or just ignore, carrying on as if nothing happened, simply keep the glamour going as the money endlessly piles into their coffers.…..

On November 23, 2017 Alexander Art created on the Tate Modern wall his "Monument to despair" with Molotov cocktails.

(To be expected the directors / curators did not reply but did our interventions have a positive effect? Well surprise, surprise, we weren’t allowed to know … Nonetheless, some of our own shit is permanently (?) on display at the Tate – which is why we were asked by the VOID collective to intervene in the first instance. However, we have never checked out where this shit is placed exactly as the Tate Mausoleum is too depressing –too anti life - to enter).

“Having remained partisans of a still unacceptable anti-art activism gateway to an individual / communal creative insurgency which characterised King Mob fifty years ago we fully support the explosive, courageous direct action of Alexandra Art in drastically exposing the utter bankruptcy of what still passes for modern art venerably displayed in London’s Tate Modern’s kleptocratic citadel. What this guy has done - this latter day heir of the best moments of Russian nihilism - from Pisarev and Chernyshevsky in the latter half of the 19th century through to Malevich in the first two and a half decades of the 20th century, really does mean something . But what precisely? It points to a lacunae world wide – and not just in Russia – that the revolution of modern art has so far not been followed up via the praxis of the modern art of revolution . Instead, post the liberating creative uprisings of the late 1960s / early 1970s, an extensive decrepit period of social glaciations underpinned by the rise of neo-liberal capitalism has gradually kicked-in destroying all hope of authentic life. This malaise has been aided and abetted by an obsequious, all enveloping post-modernism recuperating and disabling the best of subversive responses emanating from modern art whose heyday was dead and gone by the mid 20th century. All that survives are mere entrails getting ever weaker, displays of meaningless boring sensationalisms, gimmicks, surface appearances and vapid repetitions decade after wearisome decade. It amounts to the idolatry of eternal, same old, same old entertainment; an endless show of visual nothingness hung out to dry in super de-luxe gentrified vistas crowned with sensational price tags instantly accessible on every dreary Iphone.

Fiat money and the dregs of modern art are now inseparable. In comparison Alexandae Art’s direct action is the only creative act Tate Modern has ever hosted, albeit unwillingly though for certain the museum’s biggest ever hit! Beyond the shock of this genuine event lies the rediscovery of the creative praxis of total social eco-revolution ridding the world of commodity fetishism, the law of value, money, wars, work, celebrity culture, etc, etc. In short, an ever over-arching intensifying alienation existing side by side with an abject 24/7 misery visited upon the human psyche under the sway of a suicide capitalism hell-bent on destroying most life on Planet Earth”.

............Dave Wise, aka The Fekkin’ Wise Twins , January 2018............

“Fiat money and the dregs of modern art are now inseparable. In comparison Alexandre Art’s recent on-the-ball direct action happening is the only creative act Tate Modern has ever hosted, albeit unwillingly though for certain the museum’s biggest ever hit! Beyond the shock of this genuine event lies the rediscovery of the creative praxis of total social eco-revolution getting ridding of money and commodity fetishism, etc., forever. No wonder the shits in charge of KULTUR – of Artwash and Greenwash - want this guy locked up forever…..

What Alexandre Art has done - this latter day heir of the best moments of Russian nihilism - from Pisarev and Chernyshevsky in the latter half of the 19th century through to Malevich in the first two and a half decades of the 20th century, really does mean something . And don’t forget, Chernyshevsky’s What Is To Be Done? was the template a few decades later for Vlad Lenny’s, What The Fuk Are You Doing, Matey? .

Remember too, fifty years ago, as partisans of King Mob, we also attacked the dregs of art everywhere not only theoretically but with many fiery outbursts too. A leaflet collectively created by King Mob in 1968 demanding that anti Vietnam demonstrators should also wreck the Mill Bank Tate Gallery resulted in the museum firmly bolting its doors for 48 hours. Yes, some of us in King Mob paid a lifelong price for doing what we did – including the destruction of a few hallowed aesthetic portals elsewhere – a price which also included eternal blacklisting. But are we complaining? ARE WE SHIT…… WE THOROUGHLY ENJOYED IT……”

“Alexandre Art is the latter-day heir of the best moments of Russian nihilism dating back to the Russia of the 1860s when Chernyshevsky, but in particular Pisarev, attacked the need for art, arguing he would much prefer to be “a shoemaker than a Russian Raphael” / “Shakespeare or a pair of boots”? etc, etc. It is also the era of Dostoevsky's House of the Dead , (a remarkable proto-documentary refusing standard novelistic features like a plot and fictive characters) and Marx’s correspondence with Vera Zasulich resulting in his recognition of the validity of the Russian agrarian commune (the Mir) that so undermined his schemata in Capital I that the sweeping of the peasantry from the land was necessary and progressive. In England, it signalled a revival of practical efforts to recreate the Commons (an idea bigger than ever today though on a very different level than two centuries ago) enhanced by what could be learned from “Primitive Communism” (the N. American Iroquois, for example hailed by Marx and excellently elaborated on by Franklin Rosemont in 1970s Chicago). Chernyshevsky (who died in the Tsarist gulag) would also write a prescriptive book called What is to be Done . Chernyshevsky’s dislike of Pushkin (Russia’s national poet) would be surpassed by the detestation of Mayakovsky and the Russian avant-garde in the first two and a half decades of the 20th century, Malevich announcing the death of painting in his White on White , Rodchenko replying with his Black on Black . It has been rightly called “The Great Experiment” and would, because of that, be suffocated for decades by so-called ‘Soviet Communism’ (which in reality was a brutally totalitarian form of state capitalism destroying the Russian workers’ councils along with Nestor Makhno’s radical Ukranian insurrection plus the revolt of the Kronstadt sailors in 1921, etc. Clearly, then, Alexandre Art’s courageous gesture is connecting, no matter how confusedly, with an astonishingly rich Russian past which really did shake the world- and may well do so again”.

Can we evaluate Alexander Art as truth to tell he’s all over the shop apparently moving in all directions at once? There’s powerful determination alright and you can only admire his drastic actions at Tate Modern despite the fact there’s no coherent ‘general’ theory informing his fire bombings even though he is learned having acquired an often vast array of knowledge. The guy both likes and dislikes Tate Modern, the latter disposition gaining the ascendency the more he doggedly hung on to the building’s forecourt situated in Southwark Council space and not on land owned by the Tate. Alex Art proclaimed his presence for five months wearing a sign saying, “Tate modern destroys works of art” having taken issue with the Tate’s security guards early on for destroying the installation he was creating outside the gallery. It’s certainly true that day in and day out the Tate’s security guards harassed him. Later he was to further accuse Tate Modern for being “aggressive to modern artists” (c/f here “Metaperformance Resistance to Tatecide”) However, and it must be said , in no way has Alex Art superseded the trajectory of modern art which characterised the first half of the 20th century and his main inspiration still remains stuck in the moment of Kasimir Malewich’s Suprematism. He really does in his own words want to “reload abstract art” via a hoped for “abstract idealism” neglecting to acknowledge that the day of abstract art is well and truly kaput , over and out. Then blocked by Tate authorities from ‘reloading’ Alex lashed out proclaiming ARTOCIDE via his “Monument to Despair” made up of Molotov cocktails thrown in the middle of the night against the outside forecourt walls of Tate Modern. Brill! Previously - and possibly for some time - the guy had been against “corporatized art museums” despite having had art exhibitions back in Russia with tachiste paintings for sale accompanied side by side with telling quotes from Van Gogh, Dostoevsky (inevitably) William Faulkner, Kafka, etc. Alex Art then goes on to proclaim Tate Modern as nothing more than “a theme park, where the paintings of Picasso and Matisse are posters so that people can more actively visit the restaurant.” Alex further proclaims: “It’s not a museum. It’s a place for rent”. THIS IS GOOD STUFF!! EXACTAMENTE!!!

He furthermore goes onto declare that beyond modern art people need to understand “the whole universe of performance” whilst still believing in “eternity art” (whatever that is though he suggests that the 19th century English landscape painter JMW Turner is a good example) and as such sees no intrinsic artistic merit in “protest art”. Does it matter and isn’t the notion of artistic merit meaningless today? Alex doesn’t speak English so it’s hardly surprising that the guy knows nothing about the Situationists and related moments like King Mob and the American Motherfuckers, or indeed Mao Spontex in France to name the most prominent. Reading Alex’s writings you get the impression his historical knowledge stops with Surrealism suggesting that really subversive books from Western Europe / America have yet to be translated into Russian. A missing time lag of over 50 years or so at the very least seems to be the present malaise in Russia’s ‘cultural’ bookshops. On the other hand, is this truly accurate? Alex Art knows about – and more to the point really rates - the individuals that hung around a fledgling Situationist International; people like Piero Manzoni of the cans of “Artist’s Shit” fame, (one which was sold at Sotheby’s recently for 100 grand) Yves Klein - noting approvingly his axiom, “emptiness as a piece of art,” etc. In his “Manifesto of the New” Alex Art revealingly comments: “First of all we need to cancel all the talk about the death of art and the false authority of those who proclaim the death of art” wanting instead art’s “reincarnation in the person.” In reality this turns out to be a Malevich revival - a new Suprematist world outlined in Alex Art’s “Prehistory Doctrine” of “932 ideas for Suprematist innovation” – a world of suprematist ginger bread and food in general to everything within the house and street! (More than a few shades of Icteric here)...... Silly, silly bugger, he simply cannot confront the limits of end of art - art, reaching out to more contemporary and relevant subversive truths!

Alexander Art condemns modern day Russia: “There is no point changing anything in Russia, because in Russia, apart from Putin, nothing else exists”. This comment from late 2017 is in retrospect almost positively optimistic considering what was to kick-in world-wide as tin-pot dictatorships subsequently spread like wildfire more or less modelled on the American Caligula-like /Ubu Roi-like former President Trump who had only been in power a few months before Alex kicked off with molotovs in Britain. It’s worth asking, how long can this situation last as these shithead aspiring dictators are hardly in the mould of classical fascism, 1930s style? They give nothing, or at least, very little to ‘the people’ trapped by neo-liberal economic paradigms. Their roles really are endless variations, ironically, on performance art, absolutely and limitlessly favouring the ultra, ultra rich. However, Russia is something else within the performance nexus as the country’s brighter moments of inspiring subversion since the turn of the millennia have, over the last 3 years, been brutally crushed by an equally maniacal President Putin extending his reign into immortality, as he recreates himself as the ‘eternity performer’, meaning we are all fukking useless artists now!

When the name of Alexander Art crops up in conversation inevitably the figure of Pyotr Pavlensky is triggered almost simultaneously. Both essentially were moulded in the shadow and fall-out from activist subversion around the post collapse of the Berlin Wall 1990’s group Voina (War) and both exiled themselves from Russia voluntarily settling in Europe as indeed had happened previously with other Voina participants. Each considers himself a type of performance art activist in terms of extremism never before seen in its brief history. In a sense this finale of Voina is perhaps the last explosive fall-out from Happenings which were all the rage in Europe/America in the mid to late 1960s. Though literally explosive these Russians still consider themselves to be artists in a somewhat traditional sense of the term playing with form referencing poets, novelists and ‘writers’ or painters seeking glory in the Louvre or, perhaps heading for a future Museum of Everyday Life? Self important? Most certainly and the notion of artistic genius seems to remain well to the fore. Does this hamper their subversive efforts? Well, yes it does as an equally subversive anonymity is a big No No. But is it heading in the direction of a collective subversion ricocheting seemingly ad infinitum? Well it has the potential. However there is a big difference between say a Black Block anonymous collective setting fire to a bank and the same bank set on fire as part of a individual’s aspirant artistic archive; that moment where the poetry made by all blurs with the stance and portfolio of the classical poet cum artiste.

Sometime during 2017 Pavlenksky was granted political asylum in France because the guy over the previous 5 years or so had really got himself into a helluva lot of trouble in Russia which received an enormous amount of publicity both in the official media and a lot more so in the growing nexus of social media in Russia. Pavlensky was – and still is – very media savvy grabbing the headlines at all cost but does that mean his ‘stuntonomics’ is a career move that helps make lots of future dosh? In short, like a Banksy or a Tracy Emin in the UK? Hardly. And wasn’t that true even for the 1990s and Brit Pop in general whilst in Russia a counterpart like the ETI (Expropriation of the Territory of Art) were punished – as the protagonists were really done in - over and out. Nowhere more clearly than when Alexander Bremov sprayed up a caricature of a green dollar bill on a so-called “priceless” Malevich painting. Yep, really, really memorable. Similarly it cannot be said that Pavlensky makes money out of his sensationalist acts. On the contrary along with jail sentences, loony bin lock-ups, etc., he has landed himself with huge fines WHICH HE REFUSES TO PAY! Terrific. However as befits the nexus of entertainment capital, others in Russia do make dosh out of his antics. Thus, Burger King in St Petersburg made a mint out of specially marketed hamburgers inspired by Pavlensky’s performances and Russian youngsters everywhere gobbled them up in admiration....Also, never forget in the laudable antics of these contemporary end-of-art activists there’s more than an element of 19th century Dostoevsky-like, larger-than-life, mind-boggling nihilism which makes many of them admirable...AND FOR SURE MOST OF THESE GALS AND GUYS CAN’T BE BOUGHT! Around this time Pavlensky with his partner Oksana Shalygina set up a magazine which he said was “non-buyable and non-saleable” which is undoubtedly a fine gesture. Even better in 2016 he gave money to insurgent, anarchic groups suggesting his bank balance was pretty meaningless to him. Then unscrupulous western entrepreneurs also moved in quickly hoping perhaps to cleanse their tawdry money-grubbing reputations as they conned the guy. Thus in 2017 Pavlensky exhibited in London’s Saatchi Gallery “Art Riot” exhibit as in the same year he participated in a Beyond the Pleasure Principal exhibition organised around Sarah Lucas by the British Arts Council in Warsaw. Don’t forget Sarah Lucas as one of the Saatchi funded YBA’s (Young British Artists)commoditised sensationalists of the 1990s executed (!) in 1992 her Penis Nailed to a Board . Now who did that influence? Read on!

Remember Pavlensky came to prominence in Russia in 2012 in the aftermath of Pussy Riot’s “Punk Prayer” in Moscow’s main orthodox cathedral. In response to the jailing of the punk feminist outfit he sewed-up his lips (act entitled “Seam” ) outside of Kazan cathedral, St Petersburg. Then the guy really decided to spectacularly expose the repressive behaviour of the Russian authorities wrapping himself in barbed wire outside St Petersburg Legislative Assembly (act entitled Carcass ). In 2013 in a performance entitled “Fixation” Pavlensky drove a nail through his scrotum pinning it into the pavement of Red Square next to Lenin’s mausoleum alongside a written statement about Russian political apathy; “Fixation” being “a metaphor for the apathy, political indifference and fatalism of modern Russian society.” In 2014 Pavlensky in an act entitled “Segregation” cut off, Van Gogh –like, part of his ear in a protest against “the political abuse of psychiatry in Russia”. Then in November 2015 Pavlensky set fire to the doors of the Lubyanka – the former headquarters of the old Soviet KGB - now the FSB Russian Federal Security Services (the act was entitled “Threat” .) In reality he’d got fired-up over what was happening in the Ukraine supporting –unfortunately it seems and probably unknowingly - the right wing government with its fascist sympathies. (In parenthesis here one can only speculate if Pavlensky had heard about Nester Makhno’s anarchist uprising in the Ukraine -1918-21- or indeed had read books like Voline’s The Long Revolution ). The outcome was he was fined a massive half a million roubles which he commendably never paid! Previously Pavlensky’s actions had resulted in arrest followed by psychiatric intervention now he was to spend seven months in jail awaiting trial. It’s undoubtedly true that if Pavlensky hadn’t continually played on art / film / media references, playing on the roll of misunderstood artistic genius, he would have received much stiffer sentencing......Even so Pavlensky felt his days were numbered in Russia and exile beckoned.

In October 2017 he was granted asylum in France only to almost immediately set fire to a Banque de France building on the Rue de la Bastille in a performance act he entitled “Lighting.” A little later he asked a blind man to testify as his witness, selected because he could not possibly have seen the blaze, really winding up the judges who utterly flummoxed sent him to a prison loony bin. More broadly it could be said the weapons of these avant-garde performers are none other than a real life theatre of the absurd deliberately pushed off the stage becoming in the process something else entirely! In response the judges could basically do nothing but shake their heads in bewilderment their traditional roles in rags and tatters unwittingly having become part of the performance. “Lighting” was inevitably accompanied by another memorable statement: “The Bastille was destroyed by a people in revolution; the people destroyed its symbol of despotism and power. The Banque de France has taken the place of the Bastille, and bankers have taken the place of monarchs.” Sentenced by a French court for the blaze Pavlensky was banged-up in the Fleury-Merogis prison and the same prison in which Jacques Mesrine was finally incarcerated. Learning more and more about France the Russian had quickly indentified with Mesrine’s amazing prison escapades rather in fact like Debord and other situationists had before him. Yep, Pavlensky was quickly catching on to the really subversive spirit which continually flows through the beating heart of France.

Inevitably too as befits a latter day Dostoevsky–like realisation in everyday life, Pavlenksky’s oeuvre is like an innovative pot pourri combining The House of the Dead. The Damned, The Idiot and Crime & Punishment all at once. Alongside this - again as in Dostoevsky - there must always be extreme self-abasement and vile disgust at your / our own human failings especially regarding sexual proclivities and lack of any kind of sexual control and one which so often is often taken to extremes with no room for any moralistic judgements! No wonder the Surrealists memorably called Dostoevsky, “The Shakespeare of the lunatic asylum”. True to type, Pavlensky was also forced out of Russia with allegations of sexual assault alongside threats of 10 years in the slammer for everything else he’d gotten up to. However there’s a query here. The new sex angle was most likely a state set-up which was easy to carry off as Pavlensky during the Lubyanka trial (which he regarded as intrinsically part of the “Threat” performance) he’d persuaded prostitutes to act as character witnesses who then claimed he was the dregs of humanity and a lousy artist, an accusation Pavlensky was well satisfied with (c/f enclosed newspaper article here). But then things really did get hot so he fled Russia with partner Oksana Shalygina as both had been accused of raping a woman. It’s almost certainly a lie though Alexander Art when interviewed in London in 2017 believed enough of these accusations were true.

Then to cap it all, in France in 2020, Pavlensky set up "Pornopolitics" website intent on exposing, "the representatives of power who impose Puritanism on society while despising it." Benjamin Griveaux, a former government minister in President Macron's En Marche party was one of those who got caught in the crosshairs of Pyotr's weapon. (Griveaux, was/is a typical hypocritical figure who banging on about "traditional family values" was having a secret liaison with a woman sending her vids and mucky messages). Pavlensky got hold of one of the vids and posted it on his Pornopolitics web. It showed Griveaux having a wank in the kitchen! Griveaux was sacked immediately but liberal France was horrified at the Russian's crudity and official feminists hated it, even more so when they found out about the previously commented upon prostitute interlude during the extended Lubyanka "Threat" performance. What a dirty low-down way to frame a wanker! Instead of having a good laugh the PC brigade proclaimed high moral principles.

Pavlenksy in front of his art fire performance at the Banque de France

Finally though there was another much more interesting response. Since “Lighting” the more or less autonomous id-dominated Gilets Jaunes movement had burst on the scene in France with much fire-raising with Pavlensky proclaiming he was the inspirational precursor in the techniques of how to burn a bank. Well maybe but don’t forget as an artist he was also interested in his portfolio therefore he stayed in front of his flames inviting arrest. (Similarly Alex Art after chucking Molotov’s at Tate Modern hung around the joint for five hours blowing a horn before he was arrested). The polyglot, open-ended Gilets Jaunes, on the contrary, also involved fire raisers but they were hit and run activists into anonymous revolutionary sabotage and not fire-raisers with an overwhelming artistic ego. The same movement however was delighted when Grivaux the wanker got the chop and they didn’t give a fuck at the underhand way it was done; in short more in the line of the old New York Motherfucker slogan, “fight foul life is real”.

Activist intends trial to be seen as performance and asks that charges against him be elevated to terrorist offences

The Russian performance artist Petr Pavlensky has appeared in court in Moscow for preliminary hearings in a case that could see him jailed for three years.

In November, Pavlensky set fire to the doors of the headquarters of the FSB, Russia’s security service and the successor agency to the KGB. The artist had his actions recorded on video and then posed for photographs in front of the burning doors of the imposing Lubyanka building. He has been held in pre-trial detention since.

Pavlensky was led into court on Thursday morning in handcuffs accompanied by several police officers and a dog. He told the judge he does not plan to speak during the case, as he does not wish to interact with the court. His lawyer, Olga Dinze, said Pavlensky wanted the trial be seen as a continuation of the performance.

He is being tried on the charge of destroying cultural heritage, for damage done to the door. Dinze said the charge was nonsense as the door had only been installed in 2008 and no other part of the building had suffered damage. Thousands of people were interrogated and shot at the Lubyanka building during Stalin-era purges.

Pavlensky plans to ask the court to change the charge to one of terrorism, which carries a much heavier sentence. However, Dinze said this would not be the official position of the defence: “He believes the court is a farce, so wants to take the farce to its logical conclusion. But as the defence, we can’t officially ask the court to try him for a more serious crime.”

Pavlensky gained notoriety for performances including nailing his scrotum to Red Square, slicing off part of his ear, and wrapping himself in barbed wire. He said the performance on Red Square was “a metaphor for the apathy, political indifference and fatalism of modern Russian society”.

Concurrently, Pavlensky is being tried for another performance, held in St Petersburg in February 2014, during which he recreated a miniature version of the Maidan protests which were then raging in Kiev. He built a mini barricade and set them on fire while waving Ukrainian flags. The court in St Petersburg had planned to close the case due to the statute of limitations expiring, but Pavlensky himself demanded the case be heard.

During a hearing in Moscow on Wednesday, the defence called three women as witnesses. Friends of the artist said the women were sex workers whom they had approached and shown a video of Pavlensky’s performance, and asked if they would agree to testify.

All three women said they did not believe Pavlensky’s work was art and believed him to be harmful to society. “This is not art, an artist should draw pictures of daisies on walls, and bring beauty into the world, and he does nothing beautiful and nothing good,” one of the women said, according to court reports.

“It was his idea, and he was very happy with how it went,” said Dinze.

Metaperformance - a series of performances united by one common idea.

Tate Modern is one of the best world museums of contemporary art, whose goal is to study and demonstrate to people all the newest promising ideas and artworks. I thought so too, but now I know from my own experience that it is a lie. Now I state that Tate Modern is the organization which aggressive to contemporary artists and destroys works of art. On July 7, 2017, I began my performance in support of abstract idealism which completely reload abstract art. During this performance, the square in front of Tate Modern was to be turned into one of the largest abstract paintings in the world. But a few minutes after the start of my performance, it was interrupted by the Tate Modern employees, who destroyed my performance and my painting at the very beginning.

They promised that my project would be carefully studied. But having experience of communication with Tate Modern where I sent my project a few months ago, I understood that they would try to just waste time and not give a clear answer to me. Therefore I continued carrying out my performances near Tate Modern day by day.

My huge 30-meter abstract artwork on the embankment in front of Tate Modern became part of my metaperformance. This work is a clear proof of the power and viability of abstract idealism.

July 19, 2017, I received a refusal from the curators Tate Modern to include my project in their program. Do you know why? They can`t say that my project is bad and my works are weak, because they can`t prove such a statement. The reason for their refusal is that they don`t have any possibility to provide either the Turbine Hall or the square in front of Tate Modern. But in fact the Turbine Hall is now completely empty, exhibitions are held only a few months a year there, and nothing happens on the square in front of the gallery at all. Curators Tate Modern lie again. However, according to the announcement on their website, they are always ready to rent out this Turbine Hall for a corporate or private party.

Every day, in any weather, I continue my performance against the tatecide, which is an English version of the artocide. You can read about this phenomenon and about what I propose to do in the manifesto of peaceful resistance to artocide .

My metaperformance has been going on for more than a month. Tate Modern keeps the defense of its gloomy dark fortress from independent art. Periodically, almost every day they send to me their spies, who circle around, look out, photograph me from behind the bushes to inform their superiors about my standing. They try to threaten and intimidate me, but they fail, because I'm right, and they are not.

To break my performance against the tatecide, the Tate Modern tried to use the help of the staff of Southwark council. As you see in the photo, a security officer of the Tate Modern Gallery complains about me to them.He angrily stated that I should be removed from here, because my performance is not a performance, it's not art, but the protest, and it's forbidden to protest against the Tate Modern Gallery. As it turns out now not only the curators, but even the security staff of the Tate Modern have the right to decide what is art, and what is not art This attempt by Tate Modern to get rid of me failed.

Maybe it's just a coincidence, but almost every day during my performance this person in the photo below comes, stands in front of me, looks and tells someone something on the phone. His badge is always turned so that it is impossible to read his name and place of work, he costs about half an hour, then leaves in the direction of the Tate Modern. And very often during his visit provocateurs of the Tate Modern come to me. How do I know that these people are provocateurs of the Tate Modern? This is obvious, because these people in a conversation mention the facts about me which cann`t be known to ordinary passers-by who see me first time.

People often ask why Tate Modern Gallery staff did it, and my assistant asks them to ask this question to the employees of this museum. I think it is difficult to them to answer why the museum staff destroyed works of art. Therefore, they want me not to be here, so that no one will ask them uncomfortable questions, so that no one would want to know the truth about the tatecide. By the way, after my publication on the site, the man in the photo above, who came almost every day and stood in front of me, no longer comes. Yesterday, his place was occupied by two other men who didn`t hide their belonging to the Tate Modern. And maybe it's just a coincidence, but during their visit, three groups of people approached me and asked my assistant all the same identical provocative questions, as if taken from one specially designed questionnaire for them. And they made the same errors in the conversation as those people who came to provoke me earlier, talking about those facts that they could not have known if they had not been informed in advance. In general, too many coincidences are obtained.

August 27, 2017 my performance “Resistence to artocide” continues. For these about two months, hundreds of people have seen it, many people react positively, recognize me, smile, say encouraging words, and I am grateful to them for it.

Several months I carried out my peaceful performance in front of the Tate Modern, during this period hundreds of thousands of people saw it. I sent letters to Tate Modern, patrons of Tate Modern, State DCMS, Arts Council England, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Her Majesty The Queen. I have not received responses to most of my letters. Responses from State DCMS and Arts Council England indicate a reluctance not to change the situation for the better and they support the actions of the Tate Modern chiefs. So I had to do what I did.

Above: Kasimir Malevich’s funeral, Leningrad, 25th of May 1935

The real origin of The Square is about an authentic anti capitalist cum anti art movement involving creative investigation and contestation together with the inevitable fuck-ups back in the rebellious late 1960s in Newcastle-Upon-Tyne. Subsequently, it wasn’t superceded but derailed through stealthy - even lethal - banal recuperation. Almost immediately a step backwards was taken as the contestation was frozen into a museum exhibit that became something of an iconic big hit in the world of what is acceptable. The Poetry Will be Made by All! Transform the World exhibition put together by Ron Hunt from Newcastle was curated by Pontus Hulten in Stockholm’s Moderna Museet in 1969. The exhibit combined neglected moments from Russian Futurism with a big emphasis on Malevich’s Suprematism along with montages put together by Stuart Wise illustrating Surrealist ideas for the transformation of Paris in the 1930s together with various incendiary images and manifestoes from the here and now, especially New York’s Black Mask and Motherfuckers with whom we were collaborating. However this was the moment authentic revolt world-wide was beginning to stagger unsure of what to do and where to go next. In its turn this exhibition sparked numerous acts of what had quickly morphed into tried and trusted pseudo-confrontation all now safely ensconced within the recently updated paradigms of an art world where everything ‘changed’ in order to remain the same. (Examples of this so-called change was the rise of performance art transforming into the ‘land art’ movement of Robert Smithson, Andy Goldsworthy and Richard Long, etc - both secondary imitations of authentic contestation though looking original because of its new eco edge before the descriptive greenwash definition had seen the light of day).

Above: David Wise lying in Malevich’s reconstructed coffin during the four day Icteric performance in Newcastle in late 1966. Next to it is a copy of Malevich’s Black Square. In itself all this performance art wasn’t much more than a decorative re-enactment and was merely the beginning of what would quickly turn into a very consequential subversive breakaway that quickly got the lot of us in serious trouble which has never been forgotten or forgiven by the powers that be. For sure this has been hushed-up but for some of the protagonists it meant being thrown out of job, home and family via a powerful government black list with, for instance, no cushy academic role to fall back on. Never forget that it took at least until the 1990s for situationist critique to acquire some kind of academic respectability in a cretinus UK. More importantly by then it was a mere shadow, watered down with nothing original added.

There was much playing about with nature during the Icteric years and for sure horticultural daffodils arranged around the coffin also didn’t mean much. Indeed, the “living sculpture” we were obsessed with at the time was in retrospect nothing more than the beginning of a transitioning which took decades to realise. As it stood, aesthetic Icteric product was merely ornamental but one which has been repeated ad infinitum in art galleries ever since getting ever more pathetic. In short: useless greenwash (before the term was invented).... What we have to aim for is the re-creation / rejuvenation of nature in all its elemental force and truth.... and that is precisely what we did do – though decades later though his time with no glamour or monetary valorisation attached……

The neon-lit 'white' edge of the Black Square from the 2017-8 film

Alas, decades of stasis were to pass and then belatedly the original exhibition was again recognised as an ‘iconic’ moment which needed to be somewhat remembered / repeated / celebrated again. Thus a fall out organisation from the German performance art Happeners Fluxus transformed into e-flux in January 2014 now presided over by a revamped, hipster-oriented curator name of Hans Ulbricht Obrist who taking full control even interviewed authentic rebels like ex situationist Raoul Vaneigem. Obrist had also taken over a top administrative position running Hyde Park’s Serpentine Gallery in London along with other prestigious positions. e-flux was shortly followed with Obrist’s 89plus 2015 exhibition in both Zurich and again in Stockholm’s Moderna Museet. Some of the promotional blurb for the exhibit in the latter gallery did minimally tell the truth: “The exhibition itself was inspired by the seminal 1969 show at the Moderna Museet”. Immediately the new repeat exhibit ricocheted. Indeed where would the Corbynista Labour party in the UK have been without it as deputy leader John Mcdonnell took it up, imitating the title and helping create the Momentum movement (c/f MONEY/MONEY/MONEY/MONEY: Sanguinetti & Alexis Renoir on the arsehole, Jean-Marie Apostolides. Plus speculations on QE, UBI, automation and AI ) By then 89plus was a MSM / social media hit and in this air conditioned maelstrom almost immediately a film beckoned, one which would crown all previous endeavours and which found its raison d’être in The Square which then went on to capture the establishment’s top prize: the fekkin’ Palm D’Or!

Strange, yet not strange at all and yet no doubt we will be accused of living on Fantasy Island, or if not that, simply being downright liars. But that’s exactly how an elongated recuperation works even if becoming more far-fetched, even phantasmagorical. Although this particular event concerns cinema and the very axis of what was once lived passionately and directly turning into prize winning, ultra passive representation and resignation, is it unique? Not at all as indeed something similar had happened over sixty years ago in France.

Back to 1961 and the Cannes Film Festival. A certain ‘notorious’ Alain Resnais had just won the Golden Globe prize for his nouvelle vague French film Last Year at Marienbad based on an anti-novel novel by Robbe Grillet. Why notorious? Well Resnais had been refused entry to the Cannes Film Festival because he had signed Jean Paul Sartre’s manifesto of the 121 against the French Algerian war. At the time our miniscule authentic band of late teen miscreants in Newcastle-Upon-Tyne didn’t know about any of this until a year later when we piled into a tiny ‘art’ cinema on Northumberland Street, Newcastle’s main drag. After having been recently turned-on at the same gaff by Quatre Cent Coups (Four Hundred Blows by Francois Truffaut) we thought we couldn’t go wrong. Uh-Huh. Walking out at the end one of us (David Young) said: “Last Year at Marienbad, bad, bad, bad”. But we were young – and naive in another way - and though able to recognise Surrealist quotes and the Magritte-like cum De Chirico-like estrangement, we missed the essential: that this film was the recuperation of Lettrism re the latter’s negation of cinema making such subversive concepts appear flippant and whimsical.

True, by 1961 we had heard of Lettrism but basically knew nothing about its broad, perceptive theory and we certainly didn’t know who Isidore Isou, the Lettriste ‘leader’ was. Nay, farther back, in deepest Co Durham, a vague knowledge of the word Lettrism alongside skiffle had come to our attention in a loser’s bottom end secondary modern school on Kirk Merrington’s pit spoil heap football field as we played the tough pit-laddies from the nearby pit villages of Pity Me and Seldom Seen. But then there was nothing and no more salient subversive facts were immediately blowing in the wind…

By 1961, true we’d become more sophisticated but the essential was still missing: we didn’t know about Guy Debord and his ground-breaking anti-film of 1952, Howls in Favour of De Sade on the very year the Lettrist International came into existence and a step forward from a more narrowly focussed Lettrism. And the crux of this ‘film’ that no film was now possible, that cinema was dead, was dynamite. Henceforth – it suggested - shit on this passive contemplation of nothingness, this endless staring at a blank screen pointing towards a horrific empty visual world of things; of endless saleable commodities via a substitute life of spectacle…. As for Howls in Favour of De Sade , well for sure we knew something (though basically nothing) about it as after all Alan Ginsburg’s seminal Beat Generation eruption in America was a poem named Howl . We only realised the connection – and its cultural recuperation via ‘edgy’ poetry some 10 years later…..

Yes we knew about avant-garde cinema but it was Eisenstein and Dziga Vertov that captivated and then on a more thrilling level, A Propos de Nice / Zero de Conduite by Jean Vigo followed by Rene Clair’s Entracte , etc, but then – more explosively – there was Luis Bunuel’s, Le Chien Andalou and L’Age D’Or . In comparison the more recent international recognition of the French nouvelle vague seemed tame in comparison. For sure we knew about the Cannes film festival and the opportunist antics of sometime surrealist Jean Cocteau who supported Hitler, etc. We knew Andre Breton despised him and we agreed, though again we were lacking on essential details. We didn’t know that in 1955 Cocteau had redesigned the Palme D’Or and that Isou had disrupted the official jury system appointing his own awards showing his film manifesto “Treatise on Venom and Eternity” outside the official grounds where “A sizable commando of some thirty lettrists, all wearing the filthy uniform as their only really original trade mark, showed up at Cannes determined to provoke a scandal that would draw attention to themselves.” This indeed was the post second world war rootless generation of vagrant rebels against work refusing to market anything they produced such as their free Potlach mag, who brought into being the ambience of an undomesticated derive and psychogeography. That year there were such ructions in Cannes that ever after the Palme D’Or became a pretty rigid event…..

Finally attendance at the Palme D’Or ceremony was by INVITATION ONLY and in 2017 was won by the film:

We aren’t about to go into the plot and narrative of The Square as anybody can read about that via the Wikipedia blurb or buy the DVD for a few quid. In any case that’s of no importance here. This polemic is about establishing subversive markers that have been deliberately derailed to make an acceptable cinematic presentation…. Broadly the film is supposed to be a comedy taking a gentlemanly piss out of performance art. Yawn, Yawn, Yawn …

Right from the very beginning the Icteric-like gallery style spoil heaps appear and they keep on re-appearing throughout the 3 hour long film, except that in our present greenwash age they seem to alternate between piles of grain and piles of muck and sand. Re the latter Robert Smithson is mentioned playing on the real landscape /art installation rubbish designed by Robert Smithson which has nothing to do with real ecological intervention within nature. And then in the film perhaps a modern state of the art vacuum cleaner accidently hoovers everything up. Laugh, Laugh, Laugh…. Ugh, Ugh, Ugh!

Above left: Icteric spoil heaps on an art school floor in Newcastle Above right: The spoil heaps in the Palme D’Or film

Right from the very beginning too, the film is about a Stockholm based Museum of Modern Art getting into “cutting edge art” on the level of Exhibition / Non-Exhibition, Site / Non-site. More specifically it’s about placing random objects in museum space where they instantly are re-anointed as art. In the film an old formalised bronze sculpted statue on a plinth of – most likely – some historically famous Swedish warrior on a horse is unceremoniously pulled off by a crane creating a new space for…. a square. It quickly becomes obvious that this new square is based on Malevich’s Black Square of 2015 –though doesn’t specifically say so - with its original white border replaced with a thin strip of white neon lighting (see above photo). In fact a much, much bigger new Black Square of 4 by 4 metres is cut into old cobblestones, replete with brass plaque proclaiming intentions: “Equal rights and obligations” “The square is a zone of trust and care”, etc, meant to “activate the audience”. Elsewhere, the film bangs on about “relational aesthetics” a combination of art & sociology. The film continually plays with provocative contestation from an anonymous audience activated and pissed-off with art language mumbo jumbo; only to be dismissed by the platform as a rash of tourettes syndrome when somebody calls the art “garbage”. All pointlessly in-joke clever, clever bullshit.

Yet the backdrop is all ultra modern and is about the niche culturally oriented really rich along with endless hi-tech gadgetry and You Tube videos. In short there’s hardly any difference between the rich, disoriented, somewhat alienated bo-ho La Dolce Vita milieu of Last Year at Marienbad and the fuks portrayed here. So nothing much has changed in this respect. The original Lettriste milieu were more or less poverty stricken scruffs and we were hardly much different making do in a real communal piss-up with home brew wine and beer. Cars figure in The Square narrative but the vehicle driven by the central caste bo-ho’s has to be a Tesla, manufactured by Elon Musk Tesla; an obnoxious multi-billionaire showman ‘visionary' –who else? As for the art / anti art conundrum it is only about one thing only: Big Money boosted somewhat by the uninspiring ‘creative’ food obsession typical of affluent modern art museum audiences. In itself in any case the ‘art’ is about nothing more than finding the best piece of sensationalism going, one which will attract both the MSM and social media. In short: the gateway to Big Bucks and after all a Malevich suprematist painting went for $60 million in a Sotheby’s auction in New York in 2008. In the film the curators are the real subject as they are the lynch pin of art valorisation and in the film they hit the jackpot through a purposefully distasteful vid showing a poor kid blown apart within the space of the cobblestone square. Finally there’s a pseudo-passionate appeal –seemingly spontaneous - for the ultra rich to put everything right in the world. Obviously there’s nothing about obliterating the rich bastards once and for all.

Towards the end of the film its bye bye Icteric, enter King Mob and the gorilla /donkey invasion of Powis Square, Notting Hill in 1968. In the film, a sedate, rich, cultured, gathering in a super de luxe luxury dining venue needs some frisson initiated by the organizers in a “Welcome to the Jungle” episode. A guy imitating a gorilla enters and slightly fuks them around until he really does get out of hand and then has to be knocked out cold by some now agitated members of the audience. In no way though does this episode subvert the audience / performer nexus central to the function of capitalism. Indeed, if anything the film is a paean of praise for the wonders of capitalism.

Towards the end of the film the camera pans over myriad ascending stairwells in a modernist block of high rise apartments for the poor. It’s also a straight lift from a photo in our book, Wildcat Spain Encounters Democracy “entitled lean over the staircase we are going to hold an assembly”. Apart from none of this is about subversion and social revolution. This is about getting the highest shittiest monetised award in the film industry: the Palme d’Or at the Cannes film Festival plus the Goya award for best European film plus the Robert Award for best Non-American film.......and no doubt the "plus" goes on and on and on ......

At the end of the film the credits contain a long, long, list of all those involved, that is apart from the initial very real instigators …. Always remember, only substitutes and pastiches are of any significance in an empty, ultra-commoditised, performance oriented society…………

Of course there are no abominable copyright restrictions to anything we do and anybody is free to do whatever they wish. However, The Square steals in a predatory ultra-monetised way, not so “ideas can be improved and plagiarism implies it” – mentioning yet again that great quote from Lautreamont – but so real intervention can be further trashed and the real thought of history further derailed.
