---
title: "Punching Peter Pay Paul How Avoid Shooting Yourself Foot When Building Movements"
author: "Main navigation"
date: ""
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/punching-peter-pay-paul-how-avoid-shooting-yourself-foot-when-building-movements"
source_name: "libcom.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "When you are creating rhetoric for reform steps, don&#039;t let immediate success overshadow the long-term goals."
tags:
  - "en"
  - "anarchism"
  - "libcom"
files:
  []
---

[Read on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/punching-peter-pay-paul-how-avoid-shooting-yourself-foot-when-building-movements)

When you are creating rhetoric for reform steps, don't let immediate success overshadow the long-term goals.

During the 2014 mid-term elections, Oregon became the third state to finally legalize marijuana for recreational use. Following behind Colorado and its neighbor Washington, Oregon’s bill will now treat marijuana into a similar way as alcohol with standard restrictions for age and driving. This is a major victory in a lot of sectors, no matter how you look at it. It will lower incarceration rates, especially in communities of color, while stripping one of the most common excuses to racially profile. In Oregon, it is going to significantly lower the rates of youth arrested for drug possession, which can stop them from getting federal loans for school(this in combination with Oregon’s public school funding makes college a much more realistic possibilities for low income students). What may temper this is that marijuana has actually been legal for “medical” use for years now, operating “members only” clubs all around the cities of the state.

Medical Marijuana had been one of the most targeted political issues of the past decade, and the one in which the Marijuana legalization camp had thrown the most energy towards. By focusing on arguments related to Marijuana’s various possible health claims, this has been a strategic choice on the road to full de-criminalization. The problem is that the rhetoric and organizing strategy chosen ends at Marijuana, and will go nowhere else. Medical Marijuana, while obviously helpful for many conditions, does not really match the conventional wisdom for “medicine.” This is fine, but what the Marijuana legalization advocates have argued time and time again is that it actually does fit within this framework. For years and years they have continually argued that Marijuana works like regular medicine, and it is not nearly as bad as “all of those other drugs.” This means that for people looking to decriminalize all substances, shift the conversation about the purpose of intoxication, and change the way that the culture relates to medicine, the campaigns have set them back immeasurably. The reality is that Marijuana should be available for people not because of supposed health benefits, but because intoxication is a regular and consistent part of life and all societies. The arguments being made never went after the foundational issues that create a cultural fear of drugs, and have instead kept the drug-law enforcement apparatus completely in tact. The Drug War, radicalized implementation of drug laws, and the criminalization of people who choose to alter consciousness, all are still there. In many ways, these values have even been reinforced by the Marijuana legalization campaigns. This may be fine for people whose endgame is just the decriminalization of Marijuana specifically, but for those of us who want to move beyond this one issue into a more nuanced and revolutionary perspective on drug issues, it left us cold. To top this up, the Marijuana lobby in Oregon has reverted to the same set of tactics when it came to their legislative strategy, including union busting low-wage canvassers in the Campaign for the Restoration and Regulation of Hemp who helped to get the bill on the ballot. This is not a good precedent for those who claim that legalized Marijuana in the state are going to create a surge of “good jobs.”

This tactical issue is one that comes up in movement building constantly, where by an immediate goal can often be gained by making choices that could harm long-term progress. During a campaign I was working on many years ago, we were working towards the city putting a moratorium on foreclosure-based evictions. This would essentially mean having the mayor’s office order the police department to stand down for evictions, and refuse to enforce the Marshall’s office’s orders. In one group discussion we were working on some of the rhetoric we would use to make arguments for this. One of the primary ones is the effect that empty houses can have on a block, or a whole community. They often become areas for criminal activity and drug sales. They bring down property values. They are an obscene eyesore. As we were jotting these down someone quietly held and objection. Suggesting the issues about crime and drug use both have a racialized component and a drug-fear trigger. The point being is that by referring to these issues, we continue to stigmatize drug users as well as the houseless folks that often use these vacant homes. When people complain about the “criminal element” in the neighborhood brought on by vacant houses, this is often what they mean. When it comes to property values, we again reinforce the values of middle-class property owners as a substantial reason.

The issue that was actually at hand was that there are too many vacant homes that get destroyed, become unusable, and there are growing numbers of houseless people that can make good use of them. It is absolutely true that there can be gang and drug issues around vacant houses, and the communities that are concerned about these issues are not just doing so out of racial tension, but we need to be aware of avoiding “dog whistle” language when we are working on these campaigns. This specific reform is not our end goal, instead we want a world where housing is seen as a basic right and even the most basic human needs are guaranteed by the collective society. This means both a structural and a value change, and therefore we need to keep those ideas present as we build towards large reforms.

This can create a difficult set of issues where by people over critique and deconstruct all rhetoric, which creates a culture of inaction. Instead, an option is to simply be open and honest about what the endgame really is about these movements and what the values are that drive them. In the case of housing, this really is fundamentally an issue about capitalism. While we do not want to alienate the more liberal elements of the movement, it is fine to bring that perspective as a valid point in the myriad of views that make up the pro-housing movement. Likewise, it is important to continue to point out the ways in which the foreclosure crisis did not break evenly across all groups. People of color faired much worse across all other demographics, while; in general, this was not a crisis that was shared equally across all socio-economic strata. What this means is that we are going to bring a structural analysis to issues of crime and drug use, and make sure that these ideas are implicit during decision making. Instead of going after the “seedy element” that empty houses attract, we should really look at just the reality that happens to communities when only half of the homes are actually occupied by people. At the same time, we should keep central the reasons for getting involved. We did not enter into the housing justice movements because of how bad empty houses affect property values or that they create locations for drug sale. We got involved because we find this fundamental contradiction, that there are empty homes while there are people without homes, intolerable. These different arguments make up the total tapestry of the argument for a more equitable housing, but the unequal access to housing has to be at the center.

What we decided to do is just temper the language a bit so that we did not target houseless people or drug users as individuals. Instead of just focusing on the financial aspects of “property value,” we looked instead at how the empty homes actually do drive other houses on the block into foreclosure. This is conjuring the image of the housing as a place to live rather than a piece of equity. We also noted that since working people often only hold any wealth in their home and their pension, it is an incredible attack on working people’s lives when banks force houses on their block into foreclosure and then lower the value of the only piece of wealth they have (their home). In terms of the drug use in the community, we simply note that while this may become an issue among empty houses, it is less that drugs and houseless people are the issues but instead that these empty houses are never used for community building purposes. We added that empty houses often get so destroyed that they can never be rehabilitated and used for the community.

It should be noted that none of the above arguments above are inherently problematic, but instead should just be considered when thinking about the long-term vision. A lot of this can then be mitigated, to a degree, when we have a generally idea of what total victory would look like far past this individual campaign or series of campaigns. This does not mean that we should immediately jump just to radical and systemic rhetoric entirely, that would be a large mistake, but it is good to lay a foundation for the radical critique early on. This is true in terms of the foreclosure crisis more broadly, where by many people have focused their organizing messaging around foreclosure fraud and criminality. As has been mentioned before, this has been a powerful tool to mobilize Middle America against the banks, but it fails at being able to see the fundamental issue around foreclosure is class and social inequality. While we should use the issue of bank manipulation as an icebreaker and flash point, we need to make sure to draw some of the critiques back to their fundamental core.

Many of these choices are somewhat commonsensical in that we should avoid reactionary rhetoric that demonizes the opposition with bigoted characterizations, but we need to also continue to think of the structural inequalities that, down the line, create the inconsistency we are fighting for in the short term. Forcing the city to stand down on evictions was common sense to most people on the terms that were presented to them, but we need to use that bit of public leverage to drive deeper. It is only when we can link the immediate with the revolutionary that we can effectively use reforms as a stepping stone rather than the end of the path.

Eviction Free Zone, again I enjoyed reading your article very much. There are concrete examples from your empirical experience and I always find it valuable to read such texts. Thanks!

But I would want to add that, seeing the intro, I was expecting the text to develop differently. But OK how it went. I just think the topic of reforms and concrete issues versus longer-term and deeper goals is extremely interesting and think it deserves deeper treatment in and of itself. Maybe somebody will try in the future. :-)

I wanted to comment that, here, with the housing movement, we have different issues related to this. It is quite interesting that people I would not originally expect come up with quite radical understanding of how capitalism works based on the horrible experiences they have being totally fucked over during the housing privatization process. The reason we sometimes don't expect this is that we live in a terribly right-wing country (Poland) where there was a huge anti-communist reaction, and things like public housing were relegated to the past system, something people are brainwashed to thing must be eliminated, with all other public services. There is so much brainwashing, you rarely hear any defense of the public sector in the mainstream but here, all of a sudden, you often get just average people coming up with the smartest things you can hear. They put all intellectuals, many of which just mix the interests of the poor and the cultural elites together into one thing, completely to shame.

So actually, we very often go to a more radical analysis with people from the very beginning. Now, about alienating the liberals...... the situation can be different. Now, if somebody is a tenant, if they are liberal, they are probably not going to fight with us and direct action anyway. But there are some leftist and liberal activists and politicians which tried to get involved (not with our organization but with others) who really were getting people into crap politics. So I don't care about alienating them - if they are offering crap ideas and trying to get people in a different direction, they can fuck off. Unfortunately, a lot of damage was done by people trying to make political careers as well. In the most recent months, there were also the unionists who were trying to get elected and who were cooperating with fascists. And yesterday we read about attempts to integrate people from one association into a Kremlin-funded political moment. So, at a certain moment, there also have to be questions about when having too many participants from across the political spectrum can cause danger.

Of course our local situation is particularly fucked and I suppose that in yours the liberals and just harmless average citizens that want to do good and not political careerists, but I think that one always has to be careful of liberals taking over your discourse or tactics.

Akai, I think that we probably have somewhat similar political situations in some ways.

I think that housing issues are actually a lot easier to head into a radical analysis from the start, often times because the numbers of homelessness can be set right against the numbers of empty homes. That means that radical solutions are actually the most common sense for everyone, not even just the radical folks. At the same time, since the movement is often inspires a sense of "moral outrage," you get a large liberal/progressive contingent. In general, I think its good to invite people in, but we can still stick to principles that are developed from a radical analysis. I have also seen a lot of people using movements recently to further political careers, but where I am at in the U.S.A., it is usually just for very small-time political office.

What kind of housing organizing is happening right now where you are?

There are different issues. Personally I am most involved against the privatization of public housing, landlord and bureaucratic abuse and the misuse of public resources by city officials. This is of course based on the most common situations around. While there is also sometimes problems with foreclosure or evicting people from housing they once owned but lost because of debt, this is not the bulk of the situation we encounter, so it is not like in some countries. Also, squatting is not such a typical option, although some people do it and have been doing it for years, but we have another situation which is that a lot of people went to live in public housing with relatives but did not have official permission. So they are under threat of eviction although maybe they have been rent payers for decades because, unlike true squatters, they were paying the city.

What do we mostly do? Block evictions, confront landlords who are harrassing tenants, try to block privatization and sales of public housing units to speculators. We also support people who cannot pay rent or go on rent strike and we developed a method of semi-strike whereby tenants we advise tenants who get a huge rent increase how to fight it and pay the old rates.

If you are interested I could PM you some articles in English.

I'm curious, how do you think putting homeless people into these empty homes is going to improve, or maintain, property values?

Or are you simply talking about not evicting the prior tenant or homeowner?

Many/most homeless (not families that have lost homes due to financial issues) that are homeless by choice, or due to mental issues do not seem capable of caring for a home, and often damage them through either neglect, or outright malicious actions.

When you look at what the homeless do to homes when they live in them, how do you see that being a good idea for maintaining the property value of the neighborhood for the other homeowners in the area?

This is the first article I've ever read here, so maybe this is addressed elsewhere, but I'm not sure how putting the homeless into empty homes is going to improve, or even maintain the values of the area, and that's a real concern for the people who are putting their hard work and money into home ownership in that area.

Don't get me wrong, I'd love for there to be no homeless. But, I'm not sure how simply doing something that would make us feel good up front is a solution to the long term problem that many homeless bring to the table.

i don't get why you would expect communists to care about property values.

I'm fairly certain that you claim about voluntary homelessness is bullshit. The fact that you would apparent rather people freeze to death rather than hypothetical reduction in house prices, something that would probably benefit more people than lost out, is disgusting, as is your contempt for people with mental health issues.

I'm straight up not sure where you are reading that. I would never make a claim about voluntary homelessness, or that someone should be out of a house because of mental health issues. I was organizing with Take Back the Land, which literally opened up empty houses and supported people moving in, that's my bottom line. So if you are getting that from the article, that is the opposite of my intent.

So, in general, having people living in a house and maintaining it, keeping it from become broken down as it becomes when empty, helps property values on the rest of the street. The best line of defense, of course, is just keeping the original family in there. The worst thing that can happen for houses on a block is to have empty houses also on the block, which will drive property values all around and can even pull other people's mortgages underwater and drive them into foreclosure.
