---
title: "Against Democracy"
author: "Wildcat"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wildcat-against-democracy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2016-09-08 from http://web.archive.org/web/20160908155239/http://www.prole.info/texts/againstdemocracy.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wildcat-against-democracy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wildcat-against-democracy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What is Democracy?        Community of Struggle        Communist Society [This is the text of a introductory talk which was given to two discussion meetings held in London and Brighton in 1993. It’s been typed up and made available to the communist public due to massive popular demand...] The purpose of this little talk is to convince you that revolutionaries should oppose democracy in it all its forms. Before we go any further, I want to get the argument about the use of words out of the way. A lot of people will agree with a lot of what I’m saying (or will think that they do!) but will say “Ah, Yes, but what you’re talking about is bourgeois democracy. What I mean by democracy is something quite different.” I want to suggest that when people talk about “real” or “workers’” democracy in opposition to bourgeois democracy, in fact they do mean the same thing that the bourgeoisie mean by democracy, despite superficial differences. The fact that they chose to use the word democracy is actually far more significant than they claim. This is why it is important to say “Death to democracy!”. A less obscure analogy might be that of the word “development”. Third Worldist lefties will generally say that they are in favour of development. When you say “Isn’t that what the IMF want?”, they’ll say “No, we want real development”. When you talk to them a bit more you find out that in fact they do want the same as the IMF... it’s just that the IMF have got a more realistic understanding of what it means. My basic contention here will be that however much you claim to be against property (as Lenino-Trotskyo-Stalinists do) or even against the state (as anarchists do), if you support democracy you are actually for property and for the state. In the most general terms, democracy is the rule of rights and equality. It’s pretty easy to see that this is capitalist. “Rights” implies the existence of atomised individuals in competition with each other. It also implies the existence of the state, or some quasi-state form of authority, which can guarantee people’s rights. “Equality” implies the existence of a society in which people can have equal worth — that is, a society based on abstract labour. Democracy is often defined as the Rule of the People — the People always being understood as a mass of atomised citizens with rights. On a very abstract level you can say that capitalism is always democratic. You can say that democracy expresses the essence of capital — if you like putting things in those sort of terms! — that equality is just an expression of the equivalence of commodities. Marx made the ultimate abusive comment about democracy when he described it as “Christian”: “Political democracy is Christian inasmuch as it regards man — not just one man but all men — as a sovereign and supreme being; but man in his uncultivated, unsocial aspect, man in his contingent existence, man just as he is, man as he has been corrupted, lost to himself, sold, and exposed to the rule of inhuman conditions and elements by the entire organisation of our society — in a word, man who is not yet a true species-being. The sovereignty of man — but of man as an alien being distinct from actual man — is the fantasy, the dream, the postulate of Christianity, whereas in democracy it is a present and material reality, a secular maxim.” Marx, On the Jewish Question So what are the practical consequences of all this? The most common ways that the democratic counter-revolution expresses itself in the class struggle is around the questions of class power and the organisation of that power. By “class power” I mean the recognition of the fact that we are in a class war situation and that to advance our side in that war and ultimately win it we have to ruthlessly crush and exterminate our enemies. Obviously this implies despotic power in itself. You can’t respect the rights of a cop if you beating him to death! If a trade union leader tries to address a meeting and we respon…
