---
title: "Comments on the Society of the Spectacle"
author: "Guy Debord"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/guy-debord-comments-on-the-society-of-the-spectacle"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First published in French by Editions Gerard Lebovici, 1988. Translated into English by NOT BORED! August 2005. Two footnotes supplemented or created in July 2007 (footnotes #1 and #60); one new footnoted created in August 2007 (footnote #52). All footnotes by NOT BORED! except where noted. Retrieve"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "guy-debord-comments-on-the-society-of-the-spectacle.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/guy-debord-comments-on-the-society-of-the-spectacle.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     I      II.      III.      IV.      V.      VI.      VII.      VIII.      IX.      X.      XI.      XII.      XIII.      XIV.      XV.      XVI.      XVII.      XVIII.      XIX.      XX.      XXI.      XXII.      XXIII      XXIV.      XXV.      XXVI.      XXVII.      XXVIII.      XXIX.      XXX.      XXXI.      XXXII.      XXXIII. In memory of Gerard Lebovici, assassinated in Paris on 5 March 1984, in a trap that remains mysterious. [1] “However critical the situation and circumstances in which you find yourself, despair of nothing; it is on the occasions in which everything is to be feared that it is necessary to fear nothing; it is when one is surrounded by all the dangers that it is not necessary to dread any; it is when one is without resources that it is necessary to count on all of them; it is when one is surprised that it is necessary to surprise the enemy himself.” Sun Tzu, The Art of War. [2] These comments are sure to be promptly known by fifty or sixty people; a large number given the times in which we live and the gravity of the matters under discussion. But then, of course, in some circles I am considered to be an authority. It must also be borne in mind that a good half of this elite that will be interested will consist of people who devote themselves to maintaining the spectacular system of domination, [3] and the other half of people who persist in doing quite the opposite. Having, then, to take account of readers who are both attentive and diversely influential, I obviously cannot speak with complete freedom. Above all, I must take care not to instruct just anybody. The unhappiness of the times thus compels me, once again, to write in a new way. Some elements will be intentionally omitted; and the plan will have to remain rather unclear. Readers will encounter certain lures, like the very hallmark of the era. As long as other pages are interpolated here and there, the overall meaning may appear just as secret clauses have very often been added to whatever treaties may openly stipulate [4] ; just as some chemical agents only reveal their hidden properties when they are combined with others. However, in this brief work there will be only too many things which are, alas, easy to understand. In 1967, in a book entitled The Society of the Spectacle, I showed what the modern spectacle was already in essence: the autocratic reign of the market economy, which had acceded to an irresponsible sovereignty, and the totality of new techniques of government that accompanied this reign. The disturbances of 1968, which in several countries lasted into the following years, having nowhere overthrown the existing organization of the society from which it springs apparently spontaneously, the spectacle has thus continued to reinforce itself, that is, to spread to the furthest limits on all sides, while increasing its density in the center. It has even learned new defensive techniques, as powers under attack always do. When I began the critique of spectacular society, what was particularly noticed — given the period — was the revolutionary content that could be discovered in that critique; and it was naturally felt to be its most troublesome element. As to the spectacle itself, I was sometimes accused of having invented it out of thin air, and was always accused of indulging myself to excess in my evaluation of its depth and unity, and its real workings. I must admit that others who later published new books on the same subject demonstrated that it was quite possible to say less. All they had to do was to replace the totality and its movement by a single static detail on the surface of the phenomenon, with each author demonstrating his originality by choosing a different and all the less disturbing one. No one wanted to taint the scientific modesty of his personal interpretation by interposing reckless historical judgments. Nonetheless, the society of the spectacle has continued to advance. It moves quickly for in 1967 it had …
