---
title: "Fate of the Makhnovist"
author: "Vadim Damier"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vadim-damier-fate-of-the-makhnovist"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The story of Osip Tsebriy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "vadim-damier-fate-of-the-makhnovist.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vadim-damier-fate-of-the-makhnovist.epub"
    hosted: false
---

On August 28, 1921, Nestor Makhno, with few remaining comrades, was forced to leave Ukraine, never to return again. The remnants of the legendary peasant army, led by anarchists, crossed the Dniester and ended up in exile. The heroic epic, which lasted about four years, ended. Among the Makhnovist partisans who found themselves abroad was Osip Tsebriy. Osip’s father, Vasily Grigorievich, a peasant in the village of Tartaki, Zhmerinsky district, Kiev province of the Russian Empire, having become a soldier, met anarchists in Petrograd and became a staunch Bakuninist. Upon coming back, he enjoyed great prestige and respect among fellow villagers. During the 1917 revolution, the villagers, at his suggestion on a general meeting, decided to unite in a commune and work the land together. After the arrival of German-Austrian troops and the return of the landowners, the Tartaki peasants created a partisan self-defense detachment which in turn, participated in the defeat of Skoropadsky, defended their autonomy against all the authorities that tore and tormented Ukraine. In the fall of 1920, a small detachment from Tartaki under the command of Osip Tsebriy was sent to the aid of the Makhnovists. Near the village of Yaroshenko, they merged with local volunteers in the “Fighting detachment of the Anarcho-Makhnovists” under the command of Korchun. On the way to Kharkov near the village of Dachevo, the partisans fought the red infantry. With support of the local population, the detachment continued operations and disarmed police in the village of Pyatigory. They stayed for the winter in the village of Tetev. Peasants sheltered soldiers who in turn, helped them in agricultural works in the fields. The partisans once even managed to defeat a detachment of red infinity; 500 men strong. Contact was established with the main headquarters of Nestor Makhno. In the spring of 1921 the detachment, including up to half a thousand partisans, headed for Znamenka, engaging in battles with numerous red formations on the way and suffering heavy losses. At the end of summer, in Tatievka, he joined up with the Makhnovist detachment of Belash. After the defeat of the movement, Osip, along with two comrades, escaped to Poland, then to Austria and Yugoslavia. In 1922 he ended up in Bosnia. Fate brought him to the village of Rosavats, inhabited by Rusyns — migrants from Galicia. At a general gathering of residents, he volunteered to work as a teacher; the peasants gladly accepted his offer. In November, he began teaching 85 children, and in the evenings he worked with adults for an hour and a half. After Christmas, he asked the residents to attend a general assembly and offered to help them organize their local economy. Osip explained to the peasants that they were in poverty because everyone works alone. “Your area is very rich,” he said, “fertile land, black soil, a lot of prunes, mushrooms ..., a lot of wild hogs and fluffy foxes… Just a kilometer and a half there is a good place for a mill plus, you can even install a small turbine to generate electricity… There is a good place for a brick factory… In order for your labor not to be wasted, we must form a “communal” economy.” Residents agreed with Osip’s proposals; as a first measure, it was decided to jointly make a bunch of cages for catching wild hogs. Osip helped the peasants to obtain documents for the land, from which it turned out that the village possessed another 850 hectares of public land. Many peasants complained about lazy bums and drunkards. To their amazement, the Ukrainian communard offered them a solution. He brought traps to the village for hunting foxes. “It is necessary to choose two people who would go hunting,” Osip recalled. “I suggested that the community appoint a younger guy, who loved chasing foxes, and an elderly “bum” who just sits around as his assistant. Before entrusting them with this work, I took them for 2 weeks for training. First of all, we dressed and fed them. Within two…
