---
title: "Futurism and Anarchy"
author: "Renzo Provinciali"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renzo-provinciali-translator-neo-x-futurism-and-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Renzo Provincials"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "renzo-provinciali-translator-neo-x-futurism-and-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renzo-provinciali-translator-neo-x-futurism-and-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I        II        III        IV Camille Mouclair, the clear French publicist, published some time ago in “la depéche de Toulose” an accurate study on Futurism, concerning the public’s judgment and criticism and the current warlike events. And indeed, the criteria pronounced by Mouclair in his long article are remarkable, dense with thought and varied in form, but incomplete and lacking, since he has just touched on the rough point, I will say so, of Futurism, the point of contact with the anarchist ideal. The Mouclair says: “Futurism is forming, transforming itself, into a real party because it is becoming an integral part of political and social ideas”. This is unquestionably true, but it is no less true that Futurism has never had a perfect apoliticality, that it has never shrunk into artistic manifestations alone, but, coming out of Marinettian confusion, it has often taken on various political tints depending on the events and the people that these same events promoted. When Marinetti published his manifesto, which was later that of Futurism, in the “Figaro” in Paris on February 29, 1909, he certainly did not foresee this, so the Futurist manifesto was nothing more than the vibrant, violent, brand new expression of aesthetic and artistic judgments “of a young and delirious poet” as Mouclair says, of a great poet, I add. But the present hour, the critical hour of Futurism, and two years of experience suggest, require Futurism to draw a clear and sure line in terms of politics. Thus all uncertainties, all doubts, all pseudo-futuristic people will be eliminated and a greater Futurism will arise from this purification. But, and here lies the foundation, on what political ideal can the new Futurism be inspired? Already in the manifesto of Futurism, Marinetti exalted at one time: “war, the only hygiene of the world, patriotism, militarism, the destructive gesture of libertarians, the beautiful ideas for which one fights and dies. Strident illogicality these, from a practical and political point of view, but equally exalting for an artist who ignores what logic is and pays no attention to aesthetics. And this artistic aestheticism can, could also be pitied then by the Futurist anarchist, not now that by some Futurists these aesthetic exaltations have been considered and evaluated as practical and real exaltations. So I believe, indeed I am sure, that an explanation is needed between the two interpretations, not different, but opposite, which have been united by the obscure and unfortunate exposition of an artistic concept. Is it possible that the anarchist Futurists, the subversives also in general, can still share the responsibility for Marinetti’s and DeMaria’s tripoline exaltations? No, certainly not. Therefore in this, his critical hour Futurism must declare itself, must define itself loyally and clearly, must pass its Rubicon. Having examined this point we return to our question. With what ideal should Futurism be completed? I like to answer with another question: Is it possible that a coherent man can simultaneously advocate the greatest and most general revolution in the field of the arts, want in this terrain the most complete and extensive anarchy, and be a perfect conservative in life? Or not ever, it would be a contradiction! Is it possible that anarchy and revolution do not walk hand in hand in both art and life? How is it possible to imagine bourgeois art in an anarchist society and futurist art in bourgeois society? You agree that this is quite absurd. Therefore, Futurism cannot be understood and accepted until anarchy has spread throughout the world, and so anarchy will always be insuperably hampered by archaic art and culture made up of prejudice and conventionalism. And in fact, the nationalists and monarchists understood at all before that Futurism was in stark contrast with their ideas, and for this reason, they always opposed him and even today, despite the hot and fascinating demonstrations Marinettia…
