---
title: "Autonomous Workers’ Nuclei: A New Vision for the Post-Industrial* Labour Movement"
author: "Alaric Malgraith"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alaric-malgraith-autonomous-workers-nuclei-a-new-vision-for-the-post-industrial-labour-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published on August 15th, 2009 www.anarchistnews.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alaric-malgraith-autonomous-workers-nuclei-a-new-vision-for-the-post-industrial-labour-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alaric-malgraith-autonomous-workers-nuclei-a-new-vision-for-the-post-industrial-labour-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     1. Beyond the Proletariat, but not without it      2. From without unions and within      3. Strikes and mediations      4. The Autonomous Workers’ Nucleus      5. The Insurrectionary Workers’ Nucleus      6. The Revolutionary Workers’ Nucleus      7. Party, Class and Revolution        a) History and Gemeinwesen        b) The Imaginary Party        c) The Meaning of Class in a Dying Humanity        d) The Proletariat in a Non-Classist Revolution        e) Ideology and Repressive Consciousness      8. Tactical Explorations        a) A Vindication of Cynical Virtues        b) Romantic Nihilism        c) The Human Strike        d) Sabotage and Related Matters        e) Neither Militarism nor Pacifism      9. Revolution — Anarchy and/or Utopia      10. Final Thought      Postscript: A Call to Arms for Young Workers      *Note on the term “Post-Industrial” and the applicability of the forewritten      Recommended Reading      Supplementary Literature    Appendix        Appendix A. Definitions of Previously Unexplained Key Concepts        Appendix B. 21 Aphorisms on Radical Change and Reclaiming Primality The proletariat is not the revolutionary subject. There can be no radical break with the past, no revolution, without the abandonment of this vulgar Marxist pretension. Revolutions are real changes in the material conditions and lived experience of life. A revolution cannot be abstracted into a linguistic formula with subjects, objects, predicates or whatever and still serve its purpose as a real, lived break with the previous mode of existence and previous historical paradigm. Instead of spending all of our energy trying to locate or develop the revolutionary subject we should be safe in the knowledge that those segments of humanity who partake in revolutions become the subject of the revolution as their desires are realized through the process of the revolution-making. Post-industrial societies have been so thoroughly proletarianized that it is becoming more and more absurd to distinguish between the revolutionary potential of the working class and the revolutionary potential of Humanity as a whole. We have all become slaves to our jobs. Most are wage slaves such as have existed since the birth of capitalism, but more are becoming slaves to workplace technology, slaves to that tiny sense of purpose that exists at work, but has been robbed from all of life’s other aspects, even slaves to the that petty sense of control that one gets from being a middle manager. The proles however remain highly important in that they are in the best position to capture the means of production and hopefully rapidly decommission them, thus draining the bourgeoisie of its productive capacity (which is really just the stolen creative forces of the proletariat.) The proletariat can also, very generally, be a point of union and comparing notes for the multifarious struggles against the oppressions of modernity such as racism, sexism, speciesism and homophobia, as the incredibly diverse proletariat contains within it males, females, transgendered folks, animal liberationists and people of every race and background. This is not to say that these struggles are secondary to the workers’ struggle. It is simply to say that no matter what other oppressions one may suffer under, everyone suffers from working. Work is the universal axis of oppression. We cannot turn the proletarian movement into a simplistic identity politics with the proles cast as the noble protagonist in the world-historical drama. We can not negate all classes while self-valorizing our own. The working-class cannot abolish itself so long as it is comfortable playing the role of the proletariat. Unions have become the great labour racket, union leadership a gang of squabbling politician wannabes. Like Big Business and Big Government, Big Labour shouldn’t be trusted to have the proletariat’s, or even more importantly, the human species’, best interests in mind. Unions have long given up th…
