---
title: "Anti-life"
author: "M"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/m-anti-life"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From a copy of the zine, distributed in St. Louis, Missouri."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "m-anti-life.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/m-anti-life.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Value          Bad Value          Good Value        Ethics        Anti-life        Conclusion        p.s. Dearest, Liberalism—a term which I abuse here to refer to a whole range of political discourses (progressive, radical, anarchist, etc.) related by their dependence on a common pool of “liberal” values (freedom, equality, life, dignity, etc.)—is fucked. I say this as someone who is “one of the good ones”, raised liberal and well-versed in all the right rhetorical commonplaces. “Liberalism” is fucked because it is hollow at its core, supported by a web of values that gain authority only from their constant circulation. It’s fucked up because it’s confused about its ethical foundation. If we are bold enough to ask why something like “freedom” is good, either (1) we get an answer that refers us to some other foundational value (freedom is good because oppression is bad, or because it’s a human right) or (2) the value is justified by an experience it is associated with (freedom is good because the experience of freedom is good, or because the experience of being unfree is bad). The first case is useless because it simply repeats the circulation of the same supposedly self-evident liberal values. The second case is much more interesting. The reference to experience represents a possibility for the justification of liberal values by something more fundamental and more real. Unfortunately, liberalism generally fails to get specific about experience or rigorous about how experience relates to its core values. Instead, the “liberal” prefers to invoke experience in vague terms such as “suffering” simply in order to quickly return to the comfort of their abstract liberal values. I’m generalizing a lot here, and I’m pretty ignorant about the nuances of all the diverse strands of thought I’m calling “liberal”. But in my experience, this dependence on values abstracted away from experience seems to be overwhelmingly the case in liberal spaces. The pervasive acceptance of these values makes it hard to ever reach beyond the terms of the liberal discourse. But, in the interest of being able to think accurately about what should be done, we must reach beyond these terms. What follows is my best sketch of what I think that should look like. I won’t pretend to prove anything, and I don’t even have a clear vision of what I would want to prove. But maybe I will convince you of some things, or at least start a conversation. My first claim is that experience is what makes it possible for anything to matter. By experience, I mean the fact that some things are not just physical structures reacting to and affecting their environment, but that they also, as a byproduct of their physical processes, produce experience. Certain bodies don’t just move, or think, but experience moving and thinking. The production of experience is inexplicable, just like the existence of anything is inexplicable, but it is our situation. If there were no experience, then nothing would matter. But experience on its own is not enough to make things matter. It’s specifically the experience of what I will call “literal value” that allows anything to matter at all. Literal value refers to how experiences can somehow be good or bad. “Literal” is meant to emphasize the fact that this goodness or badness is directly experienced as good or bad, rather than being an unfelt evaluation of an experience. It makes sense how something called “value” can exist within a given value system (for example, it’s good to score points in basketball because it will get you closer to winning the game, which is the goal), but it’s impossible to understand literal value, which exists as value itself, not in reference to some more fundamental goal or value. Even given that experience exists and that it will have certain qualities (like how touch feels a certain way or how colors look the way they do), it’s perplexing that actual goodness and badness (not merely qualities, but…
