---
title: "Coronavirus and Emergency"
author: "Anarchist Federation, Federazione Anarchica Italiana"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federazione-anarchica-italiana-coronavirus-and-emergency"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "We Don’t Forget Which Side of the Barricade We are On – Statement By FAI Italy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "federazione-anarchica-italiana-coronavirus-and-emergency.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federazione-anarchica-italiana-coronavirus-and-emergency.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The following article was written about one week ago by our comrades in the Italian Anarchist Federation (Federazione Anarchica Italiana) and translated by them (original in Italian). Much of this will ring true for those of us living in the UK or elsewhere in Europe. We are seeing some differences, notably the strikes of factory, construction and other workers over the neglect of their safety by bosses, whereas many of these same workers are casualised or self-employed and not unionised in UK. And prisoners are rioting. But the deadly effect of an minimally funded health system under neoliberal policies is a clear warning for those of in countries who are catching up with Italy on the exponential spreading of illness. The British media, in its unquestioning support for the military can only talk of the selflessness of the army who are now drawn in to deliver goods for the NHS, more for propaganda than anything. By linking the lack of resources during this outbreak to militarism, the FAI are showing the importance of the broader critique of heavily militarized states which may seem to sit in the background out of mind, when not engaged in expensive and bloody wars, but which can easily be called into action for internal repression too. — Anarchist Federation In the face of this crisis, state and capital are showing, with unprecedented evidence, all their enormous limitations and their structural inability to take into account people’s needs and health. In Italy, the political choices of governments have constantly cut public health (more than public, state). Part of the few resources have been diverted to private healthcare, even during the current emergency. The contemporary “regionalization”, according to a corporate-capitalist model, has then made this service (which in theory should be universal) strongly differentiated between regions and regions, between rich and poor regions. Patients have become clients and care services monetized within a general framework of competition and profit. This approach to the health service reveals its true face at this dramatic moment, leaving us all at the mercy of its philosophy, which is certainly not that of human piety and the recognition of the other as our fellow human beings, but that of calculating the minimum material requirements for maximum profit, which now translates into the lack of equipped facilities, the lack of hired staff, the lack of consumables goods in warehouses. The result is that the increasingly limited funds and increasingly reduced staff, already exploited to the limit in the ordinary, leave no margin for emergency situations. Except then to admit that the places in intensive care are running out, the staff is scarce, the respirators are not there and it will be necessary to make choices on who to treat, because is not possible to treat everyone. And all this when the State pays 70 million euros a day for military expenses. With the 70 million spent in just one of the 366 days of this leap year, six new hospitals could be built and equipped and there would be some money left over for masks, analysis laboratories and swabs for real screening. A respirator costs 4,000 thousand euros, so you could buy 17,500 respirators a day, many more than you need now. In recent weeks we have witnessed a total quackery of the political class in dealing with the emergency, with exponents from all political parties who have said everything and the opposite of everything, calling for closure and opening depending on what the opponent was calling for. We have seen the government appeal against the closure of schools by the Marche regional administration and then close the whole country a few days later, we have seen repugnant opportunisms and now we are witnessing the rhetoric of “we will make it”. If we do it, it will certainly not be thanks to national and regional governments. It will certainly not be thanks to the massive militarization of cities and borders. It will certainly …
