---
title: "Anarchist Integralism"
author: "Stewart Home, Luther Blissett"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luther-blissett-anarchist-integralism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Aesthetics, Politics and the Après-Garde"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "luther-blissett-anarchist-integralism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luther-blissett-anarchist-integralism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Those involved in recent debates about Martin Heidegger and Paul De Man no longer think it strange to talk about fascist modernism. [1] It is less fashionable to speak of anarchist integralism, despite the fact that this is no more of an oxymoron than fascist modernism. While the majority of modernists and anarchists have never adhered to full blown mystical fascism, certain strands of anarchism embrace far-Right individualism, while yet others promote ideologies of integral nationalism. It is thus not surprising that a good number of self-styled ‘national revolutionaries’ — i.e. fascists — have been attracted to anarchism in recent years. Such a convergence of the ‘left’ and right was also a feature of earlier epochs such as Russia in the 1860s or France and Italy in the 1910s. Then, as now, this ‘convergence’ took place on the far-Right’s terms. Within anarchism and fascism the state is fetishised from both negative and positive perspectives. This polarisation takes place within rather than between these creeds. If the Italian fascist movement was able to arrive at the altar of state worship through a combination of Mussolini’s widely praised translations of Kropotkin and an engagement with anarcho-syndicalism, certain strands of the Nazi movement were able to oppose the interests of the state with those of the nation. One of the principle errors in the seemingly antagonistic positions defended by anarchists and fascists is the idea that the state is the source of all social power. During the middle ages, feudal modes of class exploitation were maintained despite weak or non-existent states. Likewise, today, capitalist social relations are anchored in economic institutions which can and do function independently of the state. Capital reproduces itself not only within nation states but across nation states. In the article ‘Anarchism And Nationalism In East Asia’ included in Anarchist Studies Volume 4 # 1 [2] John Crump states: ‘Most anarchists were shocked by Kropotkin’s rallying to the war effort in 1914 precisely because for years prior to the First World War they had ignored signs of incipient nationalism in his ideas... Similarly, most anarchists outside Korea would find no less shocking the long-standing flirtation of many Korean anarchists with nationalism and conventional politics.’ [3] Crump’s claims would be more convincing if he hadn’t prefaced them by playing down the collusion between the Chinese anarchist movement and the Guomindang before stating: ‘The contrast between the Korean anarchist movement, on the one hand and the Japanese and Chinese movements, on the other, is thus quite clear with regard to practice.’ [4] Contra Crump, Arif Dirlik rather shamefully admits in Anarchism In The Chinese Revolution: ‘It may be no coincidence that the meeting in Shanghai at which anarchists drew up their plans for activity within the Guomindang followed shortly on the heels of Chiang Kai-shek’s suppression of communism, followed by a massacre not only of Communists but of Shanghai laborers as well.’ [5] In other words, in 1927 some of the leading figures of the Chinese anarchist movement entered into an alliance with the nationalists at the very moment Chiang Kai-shek’s forces were slaughtering ordinary workers! The apostolic attitude prevalent among anarchists often results in the so called ‘libertarian left’ covering up flaws in the theory and practice of those who’ve brandished the ‘black flag’ of anarchism. Given that anarchist beliefs cover the entire left/right political spectrum this state of affairs is extremely dangerous since it allows all sorts of reactionary ideas to take root within the anarchist milieu. Reviewing a recent academic edition of Max Stirner’s The Ego And Its Own edited by David Leopold [6] for Anarchist Studies Volume 5 #1, Robert Graham reports Leopold as having written: ‘Proudhon played an anti-democratic and counter-revolutionary role in the 1848 French Revolution, accepted slavery in the Amer…
