---
title: "Acting Local, Thinking Global in Post-War British Anarchism"
author: "Sophie Scott-Brown"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sophie-scott-brown-acting-local-thinking-global-in-post-war-british-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Global Intellectual History, DOI: 10.1080/23801883.2022.2136100"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sophie-scott-brown-acting-local-thinking-global-in-post-war-british-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sophie-scott-brown-acting-local-thinking-global-in-post-war-british-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ABSTRACT        1. Introduction        2.        3.        4.        5. Conclusion        Bibliography Internationalism has always been a major strand of anarchist political thought where it works on several levels. It has described their commitment to dynamic cosmopolitanism but also dictated revolutionary strategy and structured their social alternatives. In the post-war years, however, many anarchist thinkers, confronting the implications of the atomic bomb for state power and global governance, acknowledged the need for strategic revision. Retreating from the idea of revolution as a series of national armed uprisings, they shifted, instead, towards endorsing an ‘act local, think global’ approach to policy. But what did it mean to think global? This article focuses on British post-war anarchists and explores their spectrum of approaches to this strategy shift. While it recognises a common move towards more permeable notions of the local-global dynamic, it also argues for a richer differentiation among their responses than is usually acknowledged. Internationalism has long been ‘one of the few clear and stable principles of anarchism.’ [1] From the earliest formation of anarchism as a modern political discourse, it has operated on multiple levels. Firstly, as Ruth Kinna argued, it provided anarchists a way of describing the kind of dynamic cosmopolitanism they consider necessary to ensure maximum human freedom and security by preventing the formation of all static configurations of power (like the state). [2] Secondly, it offered a resource for thinking concretely about anarchist social alternatives. In place of the nation state, writers from Proudhon to Bakunin to Kropotkin, envisaged a global lattice of federated guilds or communes or cities, all spilling over formerly ‘official boundaries’ and co-operating in the free exchange of people, ideas, and goods. Finally, it informed practical strategy. Most of the so-called ‘classical’ anarchists acknowledged that a single nation or region could not become anarchist alone. No neighbouring or hosting State powers would either tolerate the threat posed to its own stability nor resist the temptation to intervene during the vulnerable process of transition. As such, the need to fend off external aggressors would arise immediately, forcing the issue of border control and constraining the very mobility that anarchists considered definitive. Anarchism, then, had always to be a world movement with the ultimate aim of fully appropriating and redistributing the means of power. By 1947, however, art critic, poet, and anarchist advocate Herbert Read declared that the absolute power which the atomic bomb handed to state leaders changed matters irreversibly. It meant that world revolution in the sense of a co-ordinated physical action followed by the global implementation of a federated system was now impossible. The movement, he continued, had to adapt, or become a romantic byway of history. [3] In one respect, this was only to accept that the world had long been shaped by complex multi-state economic entanglements and military alliances. The bomb only underscored this, confirming that the nature of political power had fundamentally changed. It was harder than ever to identify, let alone destroy, its centres and sources. What, then, were the options? Read, along with Alex Comfort, Colin Ward and Nicolas Walter are often considered part of a British ‘ bridging generation’ who, in the post-war years, helped usher in the ‘new anarchism.’ [4] The four men were all connected to Freedom the journal started by Kropotkin and Charlotte Wilson in 1886 and rescued from oblivion by Vernon Richards and Marie Louise Berneri in 1936. Although not formally affiliated with the Freedom anarchists, April Carter, an activist for the Direct Action Committee, also made an important contribution to anarchist rethinking at this time. The broad features of the ‘new anarchism’ are generally described as: (1) a…
