---
title: "Anarchists Need Space Because We’re Fighting in All Directions"
author: "Emmi Bevensee"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/emmi-bevensee-anarchists-need-space-because-we-re-fighting-in-all-directions"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: ""
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "emmi-bevensee-anarchists-need-space-because-we-re-fighting-in-all-directions.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/emmi-bevensee-anarchists-need-space-because-we-re-fighting-in-all-directions.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Our Vulnerability is Our Strength        Insurrectionary, Parallel, and Creative Spaces for Experimentation        Space Changes the Rules Anarchism requires creative experimentation and needs all the spacespossible to achieve its goals. Because these spaces and projects are vulnerable we need all the defenses with the least tradeoffs we can muster. Space-friendly anarchism offers us new horizons to create, explore, and practice while simultaneously generating new and more defensible dynamics for our radical networks. Whether as roaming insurrectionary pirates or horizontalist communes, we must make a case for space-centric anarchism and then work through the intricacies of its ethics and practical requirements. Our enemies, especially tankies, always gloat over the fact that anarchists always get slaughtered. “An anarchist revolution has never succeeded!” Regardless of this misunderstanding of longstanding anarchist projects and societies, and the backhanded glorification of brutalist authoritarian regimes, they’re right in that it is hard to protect anarchism especially while it blossoms. We abhor unnecessary games of domination and the manipulative power plays that they require. We shy away from the zero-sum outlook that characterizes most of these so-called “successful revolutions” of the authoritarian communist or corporate capitalist varieties alike. We want to build societies where people don’t have to destroy each other to get their needs met. We want societies where people have positive freedom not just social contracts with cartels of state and corporate violence. But we don’t just want it. Anarchists are practical. We dream but we also birth these visions into the world. We struggle against coercion at every level. It’s exhausting but,to an anarchist, everything is a front in the struggle for positive freedom. We are in constant struggle even if many parts of it just look like love and joy. We don’t take the simple comfort of picking our battles as a movement even if we prioritize projects individually. For this reason our movements are diversely rich... and vulnerable. Because we don’t focus on the game of thrones for power we are vulnerable to those that do. Our enemies seek to master the weapons that we rightfully fear. It corrupts them but they get better and better at it. It’s no coincidence that so few anarchist societies have thorough weapons training and the ability to practically defend themselves. We don’t want to build power. We’d much rather try to build a world where a focus on offensive violence is unnecessary. So even in places where anarchists, or societies that practice anarchist values have found the ability to defend themselves such as Rojava, Spain, and the Zapatista autonomous zones, our physical defense has often either still eventually failed or succeeded because of their relationship with other, often creative, strategies. But it’s not just monopolies of violence that we’re bad at, it’s also politics in general. We lean extraparlimentary as a movement and often try to build parallel movements outside of the reign of deeply compromised electoral politics. So while we’re building our own infrastructure and ways of doing things, the career politicians who are intimidated by us are always amassing their forces against us whether through the ballot or the police. These examples are just a taste of the ways in which our greatest assets, the very core of what we love, are some of our largest attack vectors. Because we’re vulnerable on all sides, we need space. In the immediate sense we need a place to meet, virtual or physical. We need to spread out. Space can be the abstract and general notion of the distance between two objects or the concrete but expansive area beyond our atmosphere. The fact that they share a word in English (and many other languages) is itself evocative of what we want. In our love of outer space, we are actually committing to our love of the path between things.The hear…
