---
title: "Christian Supercessionism"
author: "Afrofuturist Abolitionists of the Americas"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/afrofuturist-abolitionists-of-the-americas-christian-supercessionism-a-problem-for-the-black-mo"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Problem for the Black Movement"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "afrofuturist-abolitionists-of-the-americas-christian-supercessionism-a-problem-for-the-black-mo.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/afrofuturist-abolitionists-of-the-americas-christian-supercessionism-a-problem-for-the-black-mo.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       How it all begins:        Anti-semitism arrives:        Black Christianity:        Revolutionary Nationalism:        Black Celebrities:        What We Can Say: Conversations about anti-Jewishness in Black Movements are hard to have when we consider the reality that Zionism is real. This Kickback will be a very quick flash through of many historical concepts: anti-Semitism in European Christianity, the Hamitic hypothesis, Black cultural nationalism, Zionism, and bourgeois/capitalist thought. This is not exhaustive although I have some resources to refer to but definitely encourage further research on your own terms. Early Christians, instead of being mad at Rome for killing Yeshua, they blamed Jewish people for essentially “pulling strings” to get him killed. In the Bible, the Sadduccees and Pharisees were interpreted as having snitched on Yeshua to Roman authorities. So Jews at some point started being seen as instruments of the devil, or puppetters of satan’s activity in the dominant system. Throwing Jewish life under the bus during the early days of Christianity was part of interreligious conflict between ethnically Jewish Christians and “gentile” Christians of Hellenized/greek and other backgrounds. There was two motivations to the religious bias against Jews that started this all: 1) a theological motivation is the most apparent one. There was heavy conversation about whether memberships in the church was egalitarian (open to all) or conditional on Jewish ethnicity and Jewish ritual observance. This conversation was the main reason the Apostle Paul wrote what he wrote. 2) a missiological motivation is another major aspect of the bias. There were growing concerns at the time, due to Roman oppression of religious movements of that day, about if the church was actually supposed to be a challenge to Roman authority or if it should align with Rome to make the spread of the gospel easier. Eventually the church did collaborate with and incorporate Roman sensibilities. A certain use of Paul’s theology was essential in making appeals to dominant Roman persuasions around things like slavery, sexuality, and more—all while castigating Jewishness as hostile to the gospel’s spread. Whether this was Paul’s intent is up for debate but I can say that his and other Christians’ openness to drawing on Greco-Roman culture to illuminate the Christian Message while teaching that Jewish life could only be essential to that same process of illumination in the past tense created room for a new and problematic doctrine. Supercessionism is the name for this doctrine. It means basically the church is supposed to be the “new Israel” and Jewish rituals and law and identity should fade away as God through the church incorporates the whole world into a mystical experience of redemption. The assumption is that the “world” being brought in and Christianized is a Roman one, as that is what was the context for “gentile” identity at the time. So, what we have is some early Christians already seeing Jews as devil-collaborators against Jesus, and some Christians started tryna appeal to/draw on Roman thought in order to make the church’s spread easier. Jewish people became seen as both an enemy to Christians AND a hindrance to the Christian’s spiritual right to missionize and reclaim the world’s dominant system. What we understand today as Anti-semitism originates there, and as an ideological edifice it still retains these features: the Christian supercessionist wants to claim as their territory that which is seen as “owned” by Jewish people, and frames Jewish people as either devilish masters of that dominating system or hindrance to Christian reclamation thereof. It’s this scapegoating coupled with reactionary desire to reclaim a dominant system from the “Jewish enemy” that took a new character as Capitalism arose. Europeans had a long history of reactionary violence against Jews by this time. They had even begun to somewhat racialize Jewishness by then.…
