---
title: "Annotated Bibliography on Anarchism"
author: "Ruth Kinna"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ruth-kinna-annotated-bibliography-on-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "LAST REVIEWED: 03 MARCH 2021. LAST MODIFIED: 24 APRIL 2019. DOI: 10.1093/OBO/9780199756384-0059"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ruth-kinna-annotated-bibliography-on-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ruth-kinna-annotated-bibliography-on-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        General Overviews        Reference Works        Bibliographies        Anthologies        Journals          Peer-Reviewed Journals          Anarchism in Non-Anarchist Academic Journals        Anarchist Literatures          Anarchafeminism/Anarchism and Feminism          Anthropology          Capitalism, the State, and Alternatives          Class-Struggle Anarchisms          Community and Local Activism          Democracy and Decision Making          Ecology, Social Ecology, and Green Anarchism          Education and De-skooling          Gender and Sexualities          Postanarchism          Postcolonial Anarchism, Indigenism, Race, and Intersectionality          Post-left Anarchy          Prisons, Policing, and Criminality          Protest          Religion          Social Movements          Sociology and Social Policy          Urbanism and Utopias          Violence Anarchism developed as a distinctive strain within radical and revolutionary thought in the mid-19 th century. The political theory, often associated with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (b. 1809–d. 1865), Michael Bakunin (b. 1814–d. 1876), and Peter Kropotkin (b. 1842–d. 1921), appeared in parallel with a worldwide, international movement that shaped anarchist practices and that gave expression to a critique of capitalist exploitation, state tyranny, and an idea of rebelliousness that has been influential in sociopolitical, economic, and cultural realms. Contemporary anarchists argue about both the continuities and the discontinuities between the historical and modern movements and the antecedents of European anarchism, but there is a strong consensus that anarchism cannot be reduced to a single set of principles, conceptual arrangements, or theoretical positions that might be applied in practice, analysis, or critique. Because canonical approaches to the history of anarchist ideas are typically resisted, and because the ideological boundaries of anarchism remain contested, anarchist approaches to sociological issues are distinguished by their diversity and are difficult to pin down. However, the anarchists’ traditional opposition to processes associated with state formation, and their interrogation of the complex relationships between these processes and capitalism, society, technology, and culture, are important frames for the discussion of perennial themes, notably, domination, organization, and transformation. Reflections on the rise of the modern European state and the possibility of nonstate organization have long encouraged an interest in anthropology, supporting strongly normative accounts of mutuality, cooperation, and reciprocity. In the anticapitalist mainstream, anarchism supports a rich tradition of thinking about self-regulation, self-management, and decentralized federation. The anarchists’ principled rejection of authority has fostered an interest in systems of education, law, punishment, concepts of crime, and the institutionalization of love in heterosexual relationships, generating cultural practices and literatures that are at once subversive and utopian. Anarchist utopianism is in turn an important strain in urban design, art, and ecology. The anarchist eschewal of institutional politics and advocacy of direct action have focused attention on issues of struggle, protest, and violence as well as the theorization of direct action and prefigurative change. Notwithstanding anarchist suspicions of the elitism and complicity of academic institutions, anarchism has had an influence on mainstream sociology and is equally influenced by critical strains within it. The relationship with Marxism, though often unhappy, has provided one route into sociology. Max Weber’s engagements with anarchism have provided another; and, in late-20 th - and early-21 st -century history, anarchists have begun to develop approaches to sociology that resonate with both traditions. Since the anarchistic nature of the global protest “movement of movements” in…
