---
title: "The Anti-Caliph"
author: "Hakim Bey"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-the-anti-caliph"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Ibn ‘Arabi, Inner Wisdom, and the Heretic Tradition"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-lamborn-wilson-the-anti-caliph.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-the-anti-caliph.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     I.      II. The Silsilah      III. Ibn ‘Arabi and the Heretics      IV. Cyclic Time      V. Sexuality and Hermeneutics      VI. Social Justice      VII. Taste and Khezr, the Hidden Prophet, the Green Man, King of Hyperborea, wily servant of Moses, trickster-cook of Alexander, Khezr who drank from the fountain of life in the Land of Darkness. Flowers and herbs spring trp in his footsteps, and he strolls across the water, walking toward Ibn ‘Arabi’s ship, coming closer; his green robe trailing on green waves — or perhaps woven of waves. Or Khezr appears in the desert with water and initiation for the masterless ones, the mad and blameworthy, the unique ones… ‘And three things of this life are worthy of the glance: water, green things, and a beautiful face…’ and the Hidden Imam who vanished into a cave, perhaps in Samarra, perhaps in Yemen, who lives beyond the Isthmus of Similitudes in the midst of the sea of Images, on an island all of emerald, with trees of’ emerald and flowers of green beryl, palaces of jasper and jade — the young man dressed in black, who appears in dreams to alchemists, who initiates in dreams… and Ovays al-Qarani, hermit of the Yemen who met the Prophet — but only in dreams — who upheld the Household of All — who appears to the masterless ones in dreams and initiates them into the Order of the Ovaysiyya. Sohrawardi al Magtul, who was executed for heresy, established for himself a silsilah or Initiatic Chain, consisting of teachers whom he met in visions or dreams — that is, in the Imaginal Realm. Here then follows a list in no particular order, of names each of which constitutes a link in such a chain — Imaginal or imaginary… Mansur ibn al-Hallaj, executed for heresy, for preaching ‘I am the Truth’, defender of Satan as ‘the perfect lover and unitarian’, supporter of the Zinjarite Black Slave Rebellion, condemned to the gibbet on a warrant signed by his own sufi master; Hafez Shirazi, who recommended that we ‘stain our prayercarpets with wine’; Mahmud Shabistari, who said, ‘If moslems really understood Islam, they would be idol-worshippers’; Ahmad Ghazzali, Fakhroddin Iraqi and Awhadoddin Kermani, the three poets of Witness Play or ‘contemplation of the Beardless’; Shaykh Husayn Kashefi, nay patron alchemist-saint of Herat; Lal Shabazz Qalandar, the ‘Red Hawk’ of Sindh, shaykh of the Lawless dervishes and hasheesheen; Hassan-i Sabbah, the Old Man of the Mountain of Alamut, founder of the Assassins; and his descendant Hassan II ‘On Whose Mention Be Peace’, who declared that ‘the Chains of the Law have been broken’; the Egyptian Fatimid ‘Anti-Caliph’ Hakim, who wrote treatises on alchemy and ordered that day be turned to night and night to day in Cairo, who vanished into the desert; Sunan Kalidjaga, who brought esoteric Islam to Java and invented the Wayang Kulit Shadow Puppet play, based on the Hindu epics; Mushtaq Ali Shah the mad musician, who was stoned to death in Kerman for playing the call to Prayer on his sehtar; Mohiyoddin Ibn ‘Arabi, initiated by Khezr, chased out of Cairo for writing love poems to a fourteen-year-old girl, founder of the School of the Oneness of Being. By invoking each of these figures to bestow a particular baraka on the present undertaking, enough will have been said to those who are familiar with their names, that what follows will be almost superfluous. One meets these shaykhs by pilgrimages to their tombs, or to their books (for cenotaphs and divans are both square dead objects which may seem to hold living spirits) — or in visions, or dreams — and virtually everything we might say here is already swallowed up by their presence. ‘Catastrophe Theory’ in science deals with sudden and drastic changes in some feature of a system, such as the earth’s crust, or human society. In popular usage the word catastrophe has ‘bad’ connotations, but some sudden changes may well be experienced as positive. Revelation itself might be called a catastrophe. Mystical insight or Wisdom (hikm…
