---
title: "Bolshevik repression against anarchists in Vologda"
author: "Nick Heath"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nick-heath-bolshevik-repression-against-anarchists-in-vologda"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 9th September 2020 from https://libcom.org/history/bolshevik-repression-against-anarchists-vologda"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nick-heath-bolshevik-repression-against-anarchists-in-vologda.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nick-heath-bolshevik-repression-against-anarchists-in-vologda.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Sources “In April 1918, a telegram came from Moscow about the speeches of anarchists. At this time, the Vologda anarchists became insolent. They seized the building of the hotel “Europa”, furnished it with machine guns …turned it into an almost impregnable fortress. A lot of them turned out to be from Petrograd. The Red Guard received an order from the gubernia executive committee, to at all costs disarm the anarchists. This task was carried out overnight. The Red Guards had to contend with the so-called “violent” echelons of anarchists who were returning from the front from the old army. One of these echelons coming from Yaroslavl to Vologda, was well armed, had even a few large guns. Anarchists seized everything that came to hand. To prevent them from organising riots in Vologda, the Red Guard and the Latvian regiment skilfully manoeuvred the anarchist detachment.” K. P. Yushkov From the revolutionary past in Vologda. For the power of the Soviets: Memoirs of the Vologda Bolsheviks. Vologda, 1957. p.26. There is a reasonable amount of information available in the English language about repression in April 1918 against the anarchists in Moscow and to a lesser extent Petrograd. Less is extant in English about Bolshevik repression against anarchists in other urban centres at the same time, like Tsaritsyn and Vologda. This article aims to throw some light on the repression in Vologda. Anarchists in the Vologda region (Vologda, North-Dvina, Cherepovets gubernias) began their activities in 1917. The first groups of anarchists were created at the Sukhona artillery plant in Vologda where the anarchist Alexander Dmitrievich Fedorov was a worker (known as Alexei or Worker Alexei within the anarchist movement). Fedorov, born in 1883, often spoke at rallies and was a leading light in creating an anarchist movement in Vologda. Mikhail Vetoshkin described Fedorov in his memoirs as a “very noisy and active worker”. The Northern Federation of Anarchists was created in 1918 and the Federation occupied the Passage Hotel at 57 Obhukovskaya Street. It had 350 active supporters. Its banners were emblazoned with the following slogans: “Neither god nor master! The spirit of destruction is the spirit of creation. May the future abound! The Federation decided to issue a newspaper called Gryadushcheye (The Future ), with Fedorov as editor. The first issue appeared on April 10 th . It was planned to appear twice a week but under the circumstances which will be described only a few issues appeared. The hotel occupied by the anarchists was heavily fortified and a number of guns and machine guns arranged around the building. The anarchists gathered a large collection of literature at the building. The anarchists formed an armed unit called the Anarcho-Proletarian Regiment of Comrade Bakunin. Vologda was a major railway junction so that soon the local anarchists were reinforced by others from Petrograd, Yaroslavl and Galich, swelling the number of anarchists in the town to 900. On March 20 th , a detachment of anarchist communists arrived in Vologda and took over the Europa hotel. Three weeks later The Vologda papers reported: “ A few days ago, a detachment of Kronstadt anarchists arrived in our city to the number of 20 people. They were followed by two more detachments of 52 and 200 people ” ... But already an ominous event had taken place in February of that year with the arrest of six anarchists led by V. I. Chernov. They were arrested and imprisoned for two days after which they were released after signing a pledge that they would not take armed action against Soviet power. Following the attack on the Moscow anarchists on the night of 11–12 th April, an order was issued to on April 15 th to attack the anarchists in Vologda. The operation was led by the head of the local Cheka, P. N. Aleksandrov. The 8 th Latvian regiment, part of the Vologda garrison, surrounded the Europa hotel at 5 a.m. After several machine gun bursts the attack began. The an…
