---
title: "Constitution of Prairie Struggle Organization"
author: "Prairie Struggle"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/prairie-struggle-constitution-of-prairie-struggle-organization"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on July 8, 2014 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "prairie-struggle-constitution-of-prairie-struggle-organization.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/prairie-struggle-constitution-of-prairie-struggle-organization.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Preamble        Theoretical Unity        Tactical Unity        Collective Action and Responsibility        Federalism        Common position        Common strategies        1. Name        2. Membership        3. Organizational principles        4. Working Groups & Caucuses          Internal Bulletin          General Secretary          Secretary          Treasurer          Internal and External Secretary(s)        5. Finance        6. Organization policy We identify ourselves as anarchists within the platformist tradition, anarchist-communist or especifista tradition of anarchism. We broadly identify with the theoretical base of this tradition and the organizational practice it argues for, but not necessarily everything else it has done or said, so it is a starting point for our politics and not an end point. The core ideas of this tradition that we identify with are the need for anarchist political organizations that seek to develop: Theory represents the force which directs the activity of persons and organizations along a defined path towards a determined goal in order to form a coherent political project that anarchists want to put in practice. Hence it needs to be formulated in a determined platform. What’s more, to be efficient and to popularize this platform, it needs to be common to the whole of our group. This is theoretical coherence. All activity of the group, both overall and in its details, should be in perfect concord with the theoretical principles professed by our group. This doesn’t mean that everyone has to agree all the time (they won’t) but there does need to be a certain amount of ideological unity. Everyone being ‘anarchists’ or ‘libertarian’ isn’t enough. If half the group believe in class struggle while the other half don’t, then both sides would benefit from having two smaller groups rather than one big group which spent all its time arguing. A common platform is not enough. Indeed, to implement it, we need to use appropriate means. We believe that these means are not arbitrary; they are determined by the goal to achieve, and the circumstances of the struggle. Tactical Unity means that the members of an organization should struggle together as an organized force rather than as individuals. Once a strategy has been agreed by the collective, all members should work towards ensuring its success; saving resources and time concentrating in a common direction. A common tactical line is important for the existence of the organization and the whole movement. It avoids the disastrous effect of several tactics opposing each other; it concentrates the forces of the movement; and gives them a common direction leading to a fixed objective. The choice of the tactics is not neutral and without consequences. It flows from the goal we decide for ourselves and that’s why we advocate tactical unity. Practice has taught us that the logical consequence of these organizational principles is collective responsibility. The areas of revolutionary life, social and political, are above all profoundly collective by nature. Social revolutionary activity in these areas cannot be based on the personal responsibility of individual militants. Collective Responsibility means each member should take part in the collective decision-making process and respect the decisions of the collective. If we collectively accept some political positions and a determined line of action, it is in order that each member implement it in their political work. What’s more, if we agree on specific work to be done and a way to do it, then we become responsible to one and other for its execution. In the end, collective responsibility is nothing more then the collective method of action. Federalism is an organizational structure based on “the free agreement of individuals and organizations to work collectively towards a common objective”. All decisions are made by those effected by them as opposed to centralism, where decisions are made by a central comm…
