---
title: "The Anarchist in Uniform"
author: "Henry Brown"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/henry-brown-the-anarchist-in-uniform"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Militarisation of Anarchist Culture during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "henry-brown-the-anarchist-in-uniform.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/henry-brown-the-anarchist-in-uniform.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Introduction        Foundations of Anarchist Militarism        The Impact of the Battle of Madrid        Disciplining the Organisation        The Front and the Rear-guard        Conclusion During the Spanish Civil War, the Spanish anarchist movement became not only the driving force behind a social revolution but an active participant in an increasingly modern conflict which would eventually see thousands of its affiliates and militants serving on the frontline within the Republican Army. This article proposes to examine how military images, themes and symbols came to dominate anarchism's wartime culture, in the process reconciling their antimilitarist ideals with front-line service and asserting their exceptional quality as antifascist warriors. Examining a geographically and ideologically broad set of cultural materials, this article demonstrates a high degree of participation by many sections of the anarchist movement in the heavily militarised culture of the wartime Republic and European antifascism. This manifested itself in cults of battlefield heroism, the veneration of combative masculinity and the situating of ‘the front’ as the moral centre of the movement. We have never felt, when listening to drums and bugles, but a concentrated hatred towards everything military. Today, now, in these moments in which, feverishly and wildly, we write these lines, down the street . . . the beat of the drum [and] the call of the bugle, announce to us that the militiamen are passing on their way to the front. And . . . they are ours! ‘They are ours!’, we say to each other without speaking, while the bugles and drums that we hated before are for us, now that we are at war, the music that moves us and launches us into the fight. They are ours! They are ours! They are our brothers! The best, the bravest, the noblest of our youth! Nosotros , 4 March 1937 [1] Few associations would appear more logical than that of anarchism and antimilitarism. [2] The Spanish anarchist movement appears a case in point, having emerged from and operated within a working-class culture long alienated from the military through a series of mismanaged imperial expeditions and the importation of colonial repressive practices to the peninsular. [3] Yet, during the Spanish Civil War, these avowed antimilitarists became active participants in an increasingly modern conflict within a uniformed regular army and the state-led Republican war-effort. This prompted a major rupture in the Spanish anarchist movement between the authoritarian leadership of the anarchist syndical organisation, the National Confederation of Labour ( Confederación Nacional del Trabajo ; CNT), and the militant sections of the movement that strived to maintain anarchist orthodoxy against, what Danny Evans terms, the ‘recession of revolutionary horizons.’ [4] Although the political and organisational dynamics of this struggle have been well-analysed, a major cultural shift was also at work in the anarchist movement manifested in the proliferation and elevation of martial symbols not only within the outlets of the Higher Committees (the leadership bodies of Spain's anarcho-syndicalist movement) but also those of their anti-statist critics, as shown in the extract above. [5] For while many anarchists decried the resurgence of the Republican state and the authoritarian behaviour of their leadership, they were nonetheless willing to instrumentalise a common repertoire of martial symbols, tropes and archetypes in their battle for organisational hegemony. During the Civil War, anarchism's hero-martyr traditions came to hail not only the combative masculinity of the gunslinger ( pistolero ) but the technical achievements of the officer, the engineer, and the commissar. For some, military service became a vital step in the emancipation of the working-class by stripping the soldier of his material dependencies, allowing him to attain a more moral and enlightened status. These symbols …
