---
title: "The Anarchist Utopia"
author: "Jim Shamlin"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jim-shamlin-the-anarchist-utopia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "“Another brief piece written for THE ANARCH, ‘The Anarchist Utopia’ focuses on defining the ‘perfect’ society Anarchists should endeavor to achieve. Like ‘Economic Corollaries,’ this piece tends to be more vague about ‘what is’ than about ‘what isn’t’ — but that is the result of the same obstacle: t"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jim-shamlin-the-anarchist-utopia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jim-shamlin-the-anarchist-utopia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

It is too often characteristic of utopian visions to be fantastic departures from the society we currently inhabit. The cartoonish exaggerations that “ideal” societies comprise make such concepts seem idealistic — not only impractical, but impracticable. Even if an individual considers such a radical change desirable, the implicit or explicit acknowledgment of its extravagant scale is counterproductive to the very purpose of utopia: it engenders apathy rather than enthusiasm for the realization of the utopian vision. Moreover, to suggest that life in an anarchist utopia would be radically different from life in present society is to overestimate the importance of government: It is axiomatic to anarchism that government is an unnecessary element in present society, so the degree to which an anarchist utopia differs from present society should reflect a change that is equal in scale to the influence of government in the present society. Thus, the goal of anarchism is not a radical utopia, but a relatively minor adjustment, the benefits of which would have a relatively minor effect upon the course of our daily existence. Regardless of whether one lives in a dictatorship or a democracy, the fundamental needs if the individual citizen, and the courses of action necessary to the fulfillment of those needs, remain the same. Moreover, when the history of societies in general is considered, it is technology rather than government that has affected the ways in which the needs are fulfilled [1] . A single invention, the tractor, has done far more to alleviate hunger on a global scale than countless generations of myriad forms of government. Moreover, the needs of the individual citizen are individual needs — this would seem to be tautological, and would be ludicrously redundant to mention if arguments to the contrary, that government is somehow essential to human existence, did not explicitly or implicitly rely on quite the opposite: that the needs of the individual are necessarily [but often inexplicably) dependent upon society, and vice versa. That is not to deny that cooperation among individuals facilitates the accomplishment of goals that satisfy the same requisites. Indeed, when cooperation is egalitarian, each party can fulfill his needs with greater ease that would be possible through individual effort. Even when such “cooperation” is more parasitic, the benefits of the relationship are preferable to at least one party [2] . But simplicity, on any scale, does not equal necessity. Excepting certain species of insect, every animal is able to sustain itself in isolation. Humans, the dullest of which is far more cunning that the “smartest” beast, are no exception, but rather an exceptional example of a species that can live, even thrive, in solitude. The customary counterpoint to this hypothesis is that man does not presently live in isolation, nor is there historical evidence that he ever has [3] . It is “impossible,” proponents of statism aver, to even conceive of man living without a society to support him — but the same individuals find it equally impossible to conceive of man living without air conditioning or electric hair-dryers. Like the latter items, socialized existence is a luxury item. It is possible for man to exist in solitude, for a single individual to fulfill the requirements of his existence and even to obtain some measure of luxury by individual effort. Because certain goals are more easily achieved by cooperation does not mean that they can only be achieved by cooperation. Even if one acknowledges that a cooperative social existence is preferable to the arduous [but not impossible) task of individual sustenance, or even goes to the extreme of deeming social existence essential, there is still no evidence that such cooperation necessitates government. Granted, if the mutual efforts of individuals working in conjunction are to be effective, organization is necessary. When a mere two or three are involved, this organ…
