---
title: "Between Analysis and Vision"
author: "A. Morefus"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/a-morefus-between-analysis-and-vision"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Moving Beyond the Theory-Practice Dichotomy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "a-morefus-between-analysis-and-vision.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/a-morefus-between-analysis-and-vision.epub"
    hosted: false
---

I am cruising currently, right now. I am cruising because I have dedicated myself to all that is creative and destructive in my life, right now. And I am equally in love with every aspect of my life, and all the ingredients that have caused me turmoil and all the ingredients that have caused me glory. I am the living whispered warning in the Roman general’s ear “glory is fleeting”, and in that verb, that active verb, “fleeting”, there I live; there I reside in this moment. I have dedicated my life to the idiom, “I don’t know”, and I am in love with the frantic chaos of this limitless universe. - Timothy “Speed” Levitch, The Cruise Pointed threats, they bluff with scorn Suicide remarks are torn, from the fool’s gold mouth-piece, the hollow horn, plays wasted words, proves to worn, that he not busy being born, is busy dying - Bob Dylan, It’s Alright, Ma (I’m Only Bleeding) As anarchists desiring to be relevant outside of the mostly insular academic journals or often sectarian theoretical discussion groups, it is important to openly explore the space between analysis - the critical look at the entanglement of systems, institutions, and circumstances which have brought us to this point (i.e. civilization), and our own personal and communal liberatory visions - the world we are trying to create (i.e. a return to wildness). This is an acknowledgment of the complex and multi-faceted nature of any political or social movement, the space it inhabits, as well as the interpersonal relationships which develop within and outside of it. Some level of reconciliation with the conflict between our own unrestrained aspirations and the world we live in must occur before we can proceed in changing ourselves or the condition in which we dwell. This is not a support of compromise as a method of action, or a “let’s wait till later to fight” attitude, but instead a mediation of the infinite directions and obstacles we must navigate around and through. I am not speaking of what has been described as “anarcho-realism”, for that implies a denial of subjectivity and also usually entails “playing their games” or “selling-out” as a model of social change, thus putting it into direct conflict with anarchy. In order to be effective and in tune with the process of change, however, it is important to prioritize fluidity and flexibility over rigidity and purity, and to understand complexity as something which contains contradiction. For a qualitatively different world, it is helpful to synthesize the positive aspects of previous attempts at creating liberated societies or circumstances, to learn from past mistakes, and most importantly, to go beyond, or apart from, prior methods. Moving along ideological lines has proven to be only good at superficially unifying mass populations, and is ultimately limited by its homogenizing process and disconnection from individual realities, as well as its lack of relevance to the larger political context. We must step outside of the two segregated, linear, and illusory models of social change: 1) The development of a perfect critique along with the deconstruction our own social programming and conception of “flawless” interpersonal relationships in order to sometime down the road “fight the revolution” or 2) “Fighting the revolution now” and then later dealing with the damaged survivors’ bodies, hearts, and minds (the “we’ll figure it out later” approach) . Both are limited and dangerous models to work from. Limited, in the sense that one cannot happen without the other; they must be organically intertwined along with many other priorities. Dangerous, because we will never get to the stage of physically dismantling the apparatus of control and its institutions if we are exclusively inwardly focused; and equally dangerous, because as damaged and pathologically socialized beings, we will reproduce unhealthy and dominating patterns, ultimately recreating an unqualitatively different society. Presentation style can be problemati…
