---
title: "Confessions of a criminal"
author: "Rocco Siciliano"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rocco-siciliano-confessions-of-a-criminal"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An English translation of an article by Rocco Siciliano originally published in Kapinatyöläinen #29, spring 2001. Retrieved on 3rd November 2021 from anttirautiainen.livejournal.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rocco-siciliano-confessions-of-a-criminal.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rocco-siciliano-confessions-of-a-criminal.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       On branded clothes        On IT-giants        On organised crime        On artists and consumer protection When I was eleven years old and got Commodore 64, I quickly got hundreds of illegal pirate games from my friends. In a charter tour to Malta with parents I bought several cheap pirate tapes. Years later when I took a ferry to Tallinn I did not missed pirate product supply of the Mustamäki market. And every single program in any computer I have had has been installed illegally by my friend who works in a computer magazine. What a twisted person I have become. But that is hardly surprising, taking into account my upbringing. In that same Malta trip my parents bought a video cassette, which they for sure knew was a pirate. And when we travelled to Turkey, they bought a whole stack of fraud Lacoste t-shirts, since they where almost free in comparison to any T-shirts sold in Finland, with label or without. And just a couple of years ago our family friend from Russia gave my parents several pirate CD-ROMs, and even installed them to their computer. I hope at least church had something to say about this moral decadence. In January 2001 Helsingin Sanomat wrote that EU office on competition is certain that record companies have a cartel on CD-prices in Europe. CD’s in Europe are 25% more expensive than those in US, where a cartel is suspected as well. I just wonder how much a normal CD would cost, if record companies had to compete with the same rules as bus companies in the capital area? Whatever, Helsingin Sanomat wrote only once about cartel of the record companies. But at least once a month it writes hyperbola about production, selling, smuggling or buying of pirate CD’s, although seldom it has something else to report except some new custom statistics. Lately a new concern on pirate products has appeared in articles — they are getting almost as good as the original ones. There exist piratism which one should condemn, such as production of low-quality spare parts to aeroplanes, cars and so on. But losses of record companies, computer, toy and sports clothes industry? Oh my god! When Helsingin Sanomat wrote 1997 a whole page article on piratism, they interviewed not one but two “specialists” from Nike-Finland. But when Finnish Nike-boycott campaign tried 1999 to have at least one representative of Finnish Nike to comment production conditions in Nike’s factories, campaign was told that only one person in Europe is capable of answering to such questions! And international toy corporations are not doing any better than sports clothes industry. Factories of corporations like Mattell and Disney are all located in South, and one may find plenty of materials about them from the WebPages of Corporate Watch (www.corpwatch.org). But are pirate factories any better? In average, for sure not. But in any sources of the anti-pirate crusaders I have not seen any such deficiencies listed, which one could not find in the very factories which produce the same clothes legally. At worst it is about difference between honest and hypocrite bastard. But not always, one friend of mine who visited Vietnam told that in small shops very cheap copies of Nike shoes were sold, these were produced by Nike sweatshop workers from pieces stolen during working hours. The quality was same as the original with exception of the glue which was worse, since workers did not managed to steal it from the factory. I suppose Microsoft is pissed with rivals who do not invest to product development, since they have used any means to crush any development besides inside the corporation. One of the reasons why Microsoft was originally sentenced for the monopolisation were the deficits of Windows 98 (such as crashes and susceptibility to viruses), only reasons of which was attempted incompatibility with rivals. And smaller companies are not a lot better. Developer of Netscape Navigator, a browser which for a while seriously competed with Microsoft did not get a pence f…
