---
title: "The Gender Accelerationist Manifesto"
author: "Eme Flores, Vikky Storm"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vikky-storm-the-gender-accelerationist-manifesto"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: ""
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "vikky-storm-the-gender-accelerationist-manifesto.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vikky-storm-the-gender-accelerationist-manifesto.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Gender: Its Function and Origins          Material Base          Sex and Gender          Enforcement and Sexual Violence          The Modern Gender Binary        Patriarchy          Saying “Yes” to Gender        Communism          The Communist Movement          Totality          Gender Communism          Gender Identity Under Communism          No Future        Twilight of Gender          Saying “No” to Gender          Cracks in the System          Revolution        Dictatorship of the Queer          Queer Power          Pink Terror          Bash Back          Victory At All Costs Death to gender! Freedom to the queers! But gender dies through eating its own tail. Gender is dying already. Its death rattle is upon us, but it still has time to save itself. It is on us to hurry it along to its final end. To speed it on. To make it... Accelerate. Before we can discuss what is to be done, we need to know what is. And, as always, the place to start when understanding a social system is it’s material base. The material relations that produce the social system provide us with the best grounding for understanding the social system itself. Material relations are relations of production. That is, they are the way we relate to the various ways we labor and produce things. All of society is based upon these relations of production and they produce all of our social systems. Gender is no different. So where does gender’s material base lie? Gender is produced primarily by the division of reproductive labor. Reproductive labor is any labor that helps to produce the next generation, including sex, birth, childcare, and homemaking, and gender is defined by how this labor is divided up, with the different genders being distinct classes which are expected to perform specific sorts of tasks regarding reproductive labor. The way gender differs between cultures is determined by how these tasks are divvied up between the genders. The particular characteristics that this produces are what is known as the superstructure. So, while gender is produced by this material base, it also involves an amalgamation of various stereotypes, ways of dress, formal speech, etc in its superstructure which differ how we experience our gender. And this applies to all cultures. The Bugi people of Indonesia, rather than the two genders of our society, have five genders in total. Calabai and calalai people have biological characteristics that have been gendered as male and female respectively, but they adopt the reproductive labor tasks typically assigned to makkunrai (roughly equivalent to women) and oroané (roughly equivalent to men) which provides them with a different social class. More interestingly, however, are the bissu, the fifth gender, which fills a role distinct from the other four. They fill special ceremonial religious practices and are said to be a mixture of the four other genders. Whereas makkunrai and calabai take on typically feminine reproductive labor tasks, such as homemaking, and oroané and calalai take on typically masculine ones, such as providing support for their spouse, the bissu transcend this and engage in their own tasks. The Bugi gender system shows how malleable gender can be, but it also provides us with an excellent example of the material base to gender. The five genders of the Bugi are distinguished by how reproductive labor is divided among the Bugi people. Everything else is produced by this division. Our culture is different from theirs but both are based upon the same sorts of divisions of reproductive labor. What produces gender is how these tasks are divvied up and all else follows from this. This talk of material relations so often come down to naming capitalistic relations as the base of things, but this does not hold with gender. While gender and capitalism work together and are a part of the same social order, they do not share the same material base. This isn’t to say that the material base of gender has no relation to…
