---
title: "Against the Quarantine of Passions, the Social Epidemic"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/from-the-areas-of-the-virus-and-beyond-some-survivors-of-the-breaking-waves-against-the-quarant"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally appeared in Italian language here: roundrobin.info Translated into English by Anarchists Worldwide Retrieved on 29/02/2020 from anarchistsworldwide.noblogs.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "from-the-areas-of-the-virus-and-beyond-some-survivors-of-the-breaking-waves-against-the-quarant.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/from-the-areas-of-the-virus-and-beyond-some-survivors-of-the-breaking-waves-against-the-quarant.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Against the Quarantine of Passions, the Social Epidemic        Aphorisms about disaster        Re-passionate life In these days a new nightmare is spreading: the contagion from the so-called Coronavirus. Ten villages in the Lodi area, considered as the outbreak of the infection, and one village in the Veneto region, where the first death from the virus occurred, have been placed under quarantine. This means no possibility for people to move around and leave their homes. Throughout Lombardy, power forces people to limit their social mobility. From the closure of the meeting places to the curfew, the step is short. Prisoners of themselves and something imperceptible to the human eye, the pastoral government has even ordered through a flash decree to close the streets and reinforced the garrison of police and army, intimating that if someone does not comply with state orders they could also face arrest. A social epidemic, power can only respond with repression and surveillance. The hunt for the anointer has begun. A new spectre looms around us and its strength is its presumed medical truthfulness and the power to erase in a flash all other spectres invisible to the human eye. Bizarrely, when we talk about fast death, the social epidemic becomes urgent. When death settles into life, everything returns to the world of catastrophe. Isn’t there an emergency when the places where we live become unbreathable from industrialization and from the machine-world? No emergency when GMO necro-cultures devastate the air we breathe and the food we eat? No emergency even when we are still eating from radioactive soil contaminated by the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in 1986? And Fukushima, where nuclear technicians in that area announce that the only way to stop the radioactivity in progress is by dumping the waste into the ocean? With this epidemic, it seems that the certainties of the experts have collapsed in 24 hours. And when certainties fall, chaos is around the corner. This is the first globalized epidemic. Not global mind you, but globalized. There have always been epidemics that have crossed continents, spread like wildfire, caused death and pain. This, however, is the first viral epidemic that crosses a world in which individuals are increasingly similar to each other, living conditions increasingly standardized, consumption habits standardized. What is the ecological role of the disease? In this era of experts, where the main place is reserved for supposed medical science, little is being done about this issue. Where COP21 has failed, 2019n-CoV could succeed. Disease, and the death resulting from it, are escaped only in a world that has made mythology of the perpetuation of itself. Once cannot think that in places where millions of people live amassed, abusing antibiotics and junk food, these phenomena do not occur. The ecological question also finds a solution in the quantitative decrease of human beings, as well as on the necessary qualitative transformation of their lives. After all, how do we differ from Pinne nobilis ? These amiable relatives of the mussels lived happily in the immense underwater prairies of Posidonia ocenanica . The human being destroyed the prairies where they lived, fished them for souveniers and opened new ways of communication across the seas (Suez Canal). Now a bacterium is exterminating the few remaining individuals. Or are we like Irish potatoes, all the same, grown in intensive monoculture? Hectares of potatoes, clones of other potatoes, with the same characteristics, the same weak points. All it takes is a parasite to wipe them out. The geneticist Lewontin wonders in his book Biology as Ideology : was it a bacterium that caused the explosion of tuberculosis in the nineteenth century or was it the living conditions in the factories? They tell us not to leave home, not to embrace the people we love, which borders or roads we cannot go beyond. They tell us that we risk our lives. But what life? Maybe t…
