---
title: "The Emergence of the New Anarchism"
author: "George Woodcock, Noir et Rouge, Alex Comfort, Daniel Guérin, David Wieck, Paul Goodman, Marie Louise Berneri, Herbert Read"
date: "2014"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-graham-various-authors-the-emergence-of-the-new-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "accessed June 25, 2014 at http://robertgraham.wordpress.com/the-emergence-of-the-new-anarchism/ Robert Graham’s Anarchism Weblog, accessed June 25, 2014 at http://robertgraham.wordpress.com/the-emergence-of-the-new-anarchism/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "robert-graham-various-authors-the-emergence-of-the-new-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-graham-various-authors-the-emergence-of-the-new-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Herbert Read (1893–1968)          Neither Liberalism Nor Communism (1947)        Marie Louise Berneri (1918–1949)          The Price of War: By Fire and Sword        Paul Goodman (1911–1972)          Letter to high school graduates        David Thoreau Wieck (1921–1997)          From Politics to Social Revolution        Daniel Guerin (1904–1988)          Three Problems of the Revolution        Alex Comfort (1920–2000)          Barbarism and Sexual Freedom          Some Conclusions        Noir et Rouge          Majority and Minority        Organisation Pensee Bataille        George Woodcock          Libertarians and the War In Volume Two of Anarchism: A Documentary History of Libertarian Ideas , subtitled The Emergence of the New Anarchism (1939–1977), I document the remarkable resurgence of anarchist ideas and action following the tragic defeat of the Spanish anarchists in the Spanish Revolution and Civil War, and the mass carnage of the Second World War. Below, I have collected additional writings from many of the people who were responsible for that resurgence. Herbert Read, Marie Louise Berneri, Paul Goodman, David Wieck, Daniel Guerin, Alex Comfort, George Woodcock and the Noir et Rouge group in France were among those who made anarchism relevant again, despite its critics’ attempts to consign it to the dustbin of history. Volume Two of Anarchism: A Documentary History of Libertarian Ideas opens with excerpts from Herbert Read’s 1940 essay, “The Philosophy of Anarchism.” Read had declared himself in favour of anarchism in his 1938 publication, Poetry and Anarchism, with which I closed Volume One of the Anarchism anthology. There he wrote that he sought to “balance anarchism with surrealism, reason with romanticism, the understanding with the imagination, function with freedom.” Read was under no illusions regarding how people would react to his endorsement of anarchism. At the time, the world’s various anarchist movements were in eclipse, and most radical intellectuals supported the Soviet Union with its Marxist ideology. It was the era of “Popular Fronts” against Fascism, which the Stalinist Communists used to co-opt other forces on the left, resulting in the further isolation of the anarchists, their inveterate foes and frequent victims (see Chapter 18 of Volume One, “The Russian Revolution”). Herbert Read (1893–1968) had served in the First World War, which helped turn him into a pacifist. By 1938, he was a noted poet, essayist and art critic. In the 1930s, he helped introduce Surrealism to an English audience. After the Second World War, he did the same for existentialism, the philosophy that was being popularized in France by people like Jean Paul Sartre and Albert Camus. He was current with the latest intellectual and artistic trends, including Freudian psychoanalysis, which helped to inform his approach to anarchism, art and education. Read was one of a few better known intellectuals at the time who expressed anarchist ideas in a contemporary idiom, helping to pave the way for the remarkable resurgence of anarchism that surprised many, including some anarchists, in the 1960s. Other noteworthy contributors to this anarchist renaissance were Paul Goodman and Dwight Macdonald in the United States, Marie Louise Berneri, Alex Comfort and George Woodcock in England, and Giancarlo de Carlo in Italy. I have included extensive selections from all of these writers in Volume Two of the Anarchism anthology. Not all anarchists were enamoured with these new currents in anarchist theory. Anarchists who took a “class struggle” approach, which emphasized the revolutionary role of the working class and the need for anarchists to take part in working class struggles, such as the Impulso group in Italy, denounced the “new” anarchism as counter-revolutionary, referring to it as “resistencialism,” because writers like Read had purportedly abandoned any hope for a successful social revolution and instead advocated resistance to aut…
