---
title: "A Forest Garden Primer"
author: "Sylvia Wilde"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sylvia-wilde-a-forest-garden-primer"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Backwoods is Edited by Bellamy Fitzpatrick, Fera Sylvain, and Thuggy Whiskers, PhD. Backwoods is published twice a year by Enemy Combatant, publishers of anarchist books and pamphlets, with and eye to small scale, low-tech, and natural materials, as much as is possible within the bowels of leviathan"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sylvia-wilde-a-forest-garden-primer.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sylvia-wilde-a-forest-garden-primer.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Works Cited Forest gardens are collections of diverse and useful plant species that are modeled on the structure of a young forest. As a horticultural pattern, forest gardening is found throughout the world, particularly around the tropical rainforest belt. [1] Temperate climate forest gardening is still practiced in parts of China, and there is much to suggest that the forest garden pattern may once have been found throughout the world’s temperate forests, prior to the arrival of agriculture. [2] Practiced in diverse environments, by widely different cultures, the forest garden pattern can vary greatly in detail. The common characteristics by which the general pattern can be recognized are: Vertical stacking of different species (forest architecture mimicry) High plant diversity (200 — 400 species per garden is common) Typically established on small parcels of land (1/4 — 3 acres) [3] The use of mostly perennial plant species Producing a diversity of yields to meet a wide range of human needs (geared more toward subsistence than an exchange economy) Low energy inputs, especially as concerns on-going maintenance Forest gardens are largely self-fertile and self maintaining (ecosystem mimicry) Unlike most horticulture and almost all agriculture, which is, by contrast, very two-dimensional, forest gardens are collections of plants arranged both vertically and horizontally. The vertical partitions of space are referred to as “layers,” and the utilization of these layers by the gardener is modeled on the vertical structure of young forests, or forest edges. While tropical gardens sometimes feature up to nine distinct layers, most forest gardens comprise seven layers: the canopy, consisting of the largest trees in the garden a sub-canopy of smaller trees and large shrubs smaller shrubs herbaceous plants horizontally spreading plants covering the soil surface vining plants climbing through all of this and the “rhizosphere,” the soil layer, from which roots and mushrooms may be harvested and upon which all the other layers depend. Here in the northeast, a forest garden canopy might comprise walnut, chestnut, hickory, or sugar maple; with a sub-canopy of persimmon, plum, pawpaw, saskatoon, or hazelnut; making their way into the sub-canopy are the vines: grapes, hops, hardy kiwi, groundnut; underneath these in the shrub layer, raspberries, currants, and blueberries; then nutritious and medicinal herbaceous plants and perennial vegetables such as jerusalem artichoke, nettle, milkweed, lovage, or echinacea; and finally, protecting the soil surface, a carpet of strawberries, lingonberries, oregano or mint. The utilization of vertical space within the forest garden allows for a large number of plant species to be grown in relatively small areas. The number of species found in traditional tropical forest gardens can be truly astonishing: 200 or more plant species, of direct and indirect use to humans — not to mention, birds, insects, and small mammals — is typical on a ¼ acre of forest garden. But even in temperate climates, the species diversity can be very impressive, and 200 — 300 species over an acre or two is not uncommon. The diversity of species in forest gardens makes them very resilient to pest and disease infestations, as these usually only effect a small number of related species at any given time — if a few things fail, there are many more to make up the loss. In contrast to annual-centric horticulture and agriculture where, every year, seeds are planted and after some months, food can be harvested, the forest garden, with its large diversity of perennial species, makes harvest throughout the year – or, here in the north, throughout the spring, summer, and fall – possible (though even here we begin harvesting tree sap in late winter). The gardener intentionally selects species to provide harvests for as many months of the year as is ecologically possible, and thus, avoids the need to grow any one species in large enough qu…
