---
title: "Articles from Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed"
author: "Liana Doctrine"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/liana-doctrine-articles-from-anarchy-a-journal-of-desire-armed"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Articles originally published in “Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed” (AJODA). “Anarchy and Anxiety”, #62 — Fall/Winter, 2006; Volume 24, Number 2. “Choosing Relations”, #63 — Spring/Summer, 2007; Volume 24, Number 2. “The Age of No Opinion”, #64 — Fall/Winter, 2007; Volume 25, Number 2. “The Politi"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "liana-doctrine-articles-from-anarchy-a-journal-of-desire-armed.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/liana-doctrine-articles-from-anarchy-a-journal-of-desire-armed.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anarchy and Anxiety        Choosing Relations        The Age of No Opinion        The Politics of Blame        Anarchist Solitaire Before we go anywhere in this exploration, what do I mean by anxiety? Anxiety is a fear and the resulting set of protective behaviors which form in response to a real or fabricated threat, and continue though that threat has passed. Anxiety is a fear out of its original context. It can look like avoiding conflict, bonding, criticisms, direct answers, certain places, situations, tasks, or technologies. It can manifest as over or under functioning, cliquishness, feigned helplessness, dogmatic philosophies that favor certain personalities, angry outbursts, and the desire to control situations, people, or conversations. It can lead to not having an opinion or having an opinion about everything. It can cause us to cloud agreements or expectations, create pretenses, or outright excuses. It can look like not completing tasks on time, avoiding fascinating projects, events, and discussions. So why do we have it if it’s so destructive to our desired lives? Where did it come from? The government wants us anxious. The corporations approve. Why? For many reasons, several of which you could probably guess. For instance, anxiety is a perfect form of social control, it keeps people confused, alienated, filled with self-doubt, and unable to form strong opinions or act on them. It also promotes capitalism and creates a population cheaper and more efficient to control than outright slaves; the people will fight for the privilege to stay at home buying the locks, mace, alarms, and sedatives for themselves. The structure of our society is engineered to foster anxiety, and sells us the idea that these institutions are wholesome and good for us; we would be lost without them. Our nuclear families are defended as sacrosanct, but they breed anxiety into us, dividing us into groups too small to thrive. They keep us tired and lonely, on the edge of survival. They tell us that we’re safe, we’re part of something unique and special; a net that makes us stronger, but really we’re being isolated, alienated, and worn out. Insecure about our place in the world, we buy more and work harder to make our little enclaves look legitimate, even when they are festering with cruelty. Attempts at larger community are slandered as useless or corrupt. Our schools are designed to make us passive and insecure, they teach us to jump to bells and whistles, to be submissive and follow rules, and to train our physical needs to a schedule. We are graded on our ability to thrive under these controlled conditions; assessed repeatedly to determine our worth to the glorious system, reminding us we can never stop working to conform ourselves to its needs. And our efficiency will determine the amount of money we will make, the kind of home we will have, and the happiness we will be able to achieve. The media reiterates how much worse our lives could be, how our neighbors could be serial killers, how it’s best to stick to the well traveled paths of life. Stay with the herd of strangers held at arms length. It reports that all our fears are rational, the world is a scary unsafe place, filled with scary unsafe people. It promotes the uncritical acceptance of the entertainment and pseudo relationships offered by the television and internet, and we count ourselves lucky to simply be alive and so comfortably situated in our self made cells. Advertisements remind us how inadequate we are, how we need to buy the newest technologies, more time at the gym, the best coffee, the fastest cell phones and food, and the most secure retirement. We can never achieve enough, be rich enough or beautiful enough. The goals are unattainable and we are kept leaping for them; it tires us out, makes us unsure of ourselves. And our national myths...oh those great and shining examples of justice and equality, they remind us that if we are not achieving more, if we are not wea…
