---
title: "Communiqué for the bomb attack against the ministry of Press"
author: "R.O. December 6th"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/r-o-december-6th-communique-for-the-bomb-attack-against-the-ministry-of-press"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=4821&gt;. Retrieved on 19/07/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "r-o-december-6th-communique-for-the-bomb-attack-against-the-ministry-of-press.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/r-o-december-6th-communique-for-the-bomb-attack-against-the-ministry-of-press.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       We’re staring at the future by travelling to the past        Speaking about the armed struggle today        The third pole and politics in first singular person — Strategy as active theory        Democracy or the myth of Power        The accursed sickness of alienation and its victims        Repression and the law-abiding children of the State On December 21 st , 2008, the ‘Revolutionary Organization December 6 th ’ had fired bullets against Kougias (a well-known lawyer who defended Korkoneas, the cop murderer of Alexis Grigoropoulos) as well as against Pretenteris (a major sold-out TV presenter, one of the most arrogant and filthiest ‘journalists’ of the Greek corporate media). The same urban guerilla group also claimed responsibility for a bomb attack against the general secretariat (ministry) of Press on January 15 th , 2010, via this communiqué: ‘If keep your laws, the worse for you. The violence of the State legitimates the bloodiest of the reprisals and after the stifling voice of arms, you will hear another voice, even louder, the voice of dynamite…’ The armed struggle is one component of a multiform movement. It has its own space and time within the revolutionary history. It is an inevitable part of the struggle, not because the revolted human asks for it out of fetishism or whim, but because it will occur on his path as a result of a chain of incidents (political, social, and economical). In a power armed with uniformed killers, in a mechanism fortressed with jails-white cells, we draw a separative line between us and the enemy. As long as there will be laws that convict us, as long as you will keep burying alive our comrades, the more we will deepen the lines of armed conflict. Today we introduce ourselves in public for the first time, under the name ‘Revolutionary Organization December 6 th .’ Our choice to use the date of the assassination of Alexandros Grigoropoulos was not made just to pay a tribute to his person. It would may be more accurate to use some assassination date of dozens locals and immigrants that are being executed ‘in silence’ in the borders, in poor neighbourhoods and police stations. For all these deaths that the public opinion and its journalists were never shocked, enraged, touched. This date, doesn’t take its meaning for us just from Alexis’ death, but mainly from what followed; the revolt. We don’t have the arrogance to believe that our organization expresses December’s revolt, nor the illusion that it represents it’s continuing with other means. Our signature expresses only us and our souls. Our tears and hate; the revenge. The hope and the wild joy of the revolt we lived. The oath-vow we took those days, that when everything should end, we would never come back. And indeed, that December passed and it may take long time until it comes again, but the promises remained, and our duty now is to organize our own every-day Decembers. We do not intend to provoke any kind of supposed sentimental emotion or a contemplation of the revolt as a nice memory with our signature. We are disgusted from the anniversaries, we deny the symbolisms. The execution of Alexis and the revolt that followed were not at all symbolic acts. They were decisive events. And events produce proposals [1] . And this is exactly what we intend in: Within the events that our actions create, to imprint the proposal of December; the proposal of a revolted life. So here we find ourselves in our turn to imprint our own interpretation of the time that we’re living in; to describe our own decisions for our choice to get organized in the armed struggle. But before we start talking, we first need to travel into the past and meet our roots. Go where everything started. To start from the circumstances that gave birth to the local urban guerilla struggle, continue until its fall and degeneration to end up again here, today, to its massive reappearance. We meet, so our roots, in the post-dictatorship period and the revolutionaries of …
