---
title: "Covid-19 and Catch-22"
author: "Kristian Williams"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kristian-williams-covid-19-and-catch-22"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-08-10 from https://anarchiststudies.org/covid-19-and-catch-22-by-kristian-williams/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kristian-williams-covid-19-and-catch-22.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kristian-williams-covid-19-and-catch-22.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1        2        3        4        5 I work for the government. That is ironic, for an anarchist, but the actual job involves relatively few compromises. Specifically, I work as a drawbridge operator for Multnomah County, one of three counties comprising the Portland, Oregon metropolitan area. A week or so after the local advent of the coronavirus crisis, I started telling people that—though my day-to-day job was much the same—working for the government felt like watching state failure from the inside. The County started off on the wrong foot, sending a memo to every employee assuring us that no cases of Covid-19 had been detected in the area—a full day after Oregon Health Sciences University announced its first coronavirus patient. This snafu was followed by an abrupt decision that non-essential employees should stay home and telecommute—an arrangement for which the employer failed to provide computers, internet access, and in many cases, job tasks. Within a few days, workers were being reassigned to new homeless shelters which were opened, not to increase available services, but to make it at least technically possible for the clients to engage in social distancing. (That is, no new beds were available, but the existing beds were dispersed among several sites.) In theory, workers volunteered to staff these shelters, but I know at least one who was directly “volun-told” by his manager, and I know other people who tried to volunteer and were refused because all the shifts had been filled. Workers at one shelter reported receiving no training, no applicable policies, no clear supervision, and no spray cleaner. Later, working alone in a bridge tower, I was supplied a single N-95 mask, while the workers running the shelter were still making do with bandanas. Other confusions abound: For a while County employees were receiving so many emails from so many different offices, often issuing contradictory instructions, that it was impossible to know what rule was supposed to be in effect at any given moment. I was notified at one point that there simply were no more cleaning supplies; yet they have arrived on schedule and without interruption ever since. And, of course, there are the usual mix-ups about scheduling and disputes over pay, only on a much vaster scale and with much higher stakes. What happens, during a pandemic, if workers are not confident that they will be paid if they stay home after contact with an infected person? Nothing good. Many of these problems worked themselves out eventually, and yet new difficulties continue to arise. The County is contemplating layoffs and cuts to programming—at exactly the time that “essential workers” are being hailed as heroes, the spike in unemployment is likely to increase the need for public services, and even the International Monetary Fund is advocating Keynesian measures. Layoffs at this moment can only worsen the economic crisis and hobble any future response to the pandemic. Just imagine a second spike in cases, probably in the fall, producing another lockdown and new demands on government services—but with fewer staff available for redeployment. Covid-19 is only one epidemic that we are facing. We are also facing an epidemic of stupidity. “It’s like being stuck in a Joseph Heller novel,” a union staffer said to me, and I realized at once that he was exactly right. Catch-22 is one of those novels that I return to every few years. I would be re-reading it now, but I sold my copy on the theory that it was a book I could always find at the library. Once, it seemed like a safe assumption that there would always be libraries. Catch-22 tells the story of a World War Two bomber squadron, perpetually engaged in its last tour— perpetually , because the required number of missions creeps ever upward. The pilots, the crew, and even the command staff are all starting to crack, and everyone admits that it would be insane to keep flying these missions. If you put in for a psychological …
