---
title: "Evolution: Origins of Life"
author: "Andy Carloff"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/punkerslut-evolution-origins-of-life"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Edition 1.1 Retrieved on 22nd April 2021 from www.anarchistrevolt.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "punkerslut-evolution-origins-of-life.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/punkerslut-evolution-origins-of-life.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Chapter 1: Inheritance, Variation, Adaptation, and Natural Selection        Section I: Inheritance and Variation        Section II: Adaptations        Section III: Natural Selection        Section IV: A Note on Further Chapters      Chapter 2: Selective Breeding and Domestic Organisms      Chapter 3: Sexual Selection      Chapter 4: Interrelation through Similarity      Chapter 5: Interrelation through Reversion      Chapter 6: Interrelation through Vestigial Organs      Chapter 7: Arguments Against the Theory      Chapter 8: Conclusion WHEN on board H.M.S. Beagle as naturalist, I was much struck with certain facts in the distribution of the organic beings inhabiting South America, and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that continent. These facts, as will be seen in the latter chapters of this volume, seemed to throw some light on the origin of species- that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by one of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me, in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could possibly have any bearing on it. After five years’ work I allowed myself to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these I enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed to me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily pursued the same object. I hope that I may be excused for entering on these personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been hasty in coming to a decision. -- Charles Darwin [1] Mr. Darwin, who, I may tell you, has taken very great pains and spent much valuable time and attention on the investigation of these variations, and getting together all the facts that bear upon them. -- Thomas Henry Huxley [2] The two principles I wish to begin with are those which are least doubted, by both experience and science. By inheritance, or heredity, it should be understood that I am speaking of the occurrence when offspring resemble to a great degree their parents. To quote Charles Darwin, “No breeder doubts how strong is the tendency to inheritance; that like produces like is his fundamental belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle only by theoretical writers.” [3] By variation, or diversity (or, sometimes even, “mutations”), by this it should be understood that I am speaking of the changes that occur between offspring and parents, that sometimes a child will resemble in all degrees their parents except for some small, almost unnoticeable parts. Again, to quote Charles Darwin, “No one supposes that all the individuals of the same species are cast in the same actual mould.” [4] It may almost seem that these principles are in direct adversity to each other. The first concludes that children will be similar to their parents yet the second concludes that children will differ from their parents. To explain what may almost appear as a contradiction, the fact is that organisms will resemble their parents to a degree and they differ from their parents in a degree. Some will greatly resemble their progenitors whereas others will look almost monstrous comparably. As far as proving the truth of inheritance and variation, simple experience would seem to prove it quite easily. For instance, when two members of the same human race decide to have a child, it will be of their race, just as when two people who are tall have a child, their child will also tend to be tall. Yet these are very vague and simple correlations between adults and children. Anyone who has a family will easily be able to conclude that children resemble their parents in great degrees, in facial features, in physical strengths and weaknesses, in body frame, and in other manners. Also, too, no parent will be ably to deny the principle of variation any more than they can deny the principle of inheritance. Those who have children will no doubt s…
