---
title: "Civilization Will Stunt Your Growth"
author: "Ian Erik Smith"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ian-erik-smith-civilization-will-stunt-your-growth"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Defending Primitivism from Accusations of Ableism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ian-erik-smith-civilization-will-stunt-your-growth.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ian-erik-smith-civilization-will-stunt-your-growth.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        The Accusations of Ableism        Dulled Senses, Diminished Bodies        Personal Identity: Identity Politics        An Obligation to Care: Division of Labor is Not Mutual Aid        Magic Words and Promissory Notes        To Infinite and Beyond! Transhumanism        Conclusion        References Anarcho-primitivism is frequently described by its critics as being incapable of providing sufficient accommodation for people with disabilities; it purportedly “requires a non-disabled body for its ideal society” and is thus viewed as an inherently ableist position (Ben-Moshe, Nocella, & Withers, 2012, 216). I will argue, on the contrary, that anarcho-primitivism advocates a society that would provide for the fullest flourishing for people with a diverse range of abilities and that civilization itself acts as a disablizing force. It is civilization that effectively stunts our growth and renders many of us disabled; it is civilization that narrows the range of our senses, shrinks our world and our horizons, and denies us the opportunity to experience the full use of our bodies. The standardization of mass society necessarily defines an increasing number of people as “disabled” if they do not fit a narrowly prescribed form. The “normal range” of human variation is being shrunk and those outside of this range are stigmatized, pathologized, medicated, and manipulated. The civilized solution to living with people of different abilities is to treat large segments of people like broken clocks in need of new parts or regular servicing. This approach is in accordance with the standard operating procedure of civilization to understand every human problem as a technical problem; it allows us to discharge our responsibility to care for those around us by developing new products, offering new services, and building new infrastructure. The need for relationships is erased. In this way, civilization allows us not to care for others who may need assistance, which is to say, it allows others not to care for us when we need assistance. The civilized solution to accommodating people with a diverse range of abilities is worse than the perceived problem. The solution is runaway technological escalation with a trajectory that is currently rushing toward transhumanism. It is a hatred and a disgust not strictly for disabled bodies but for physical bodies as such. Anthony Nocella has the first and the last word in Earth, Animal, and Disability Liberation: The Rise of the Eco-Ability Movement , a book he co-edited with Judy K.C. Bentley and Janet M. Duncan. In the Introduction to the book, Nocella claims that “green anarchists view people with disabilities as a liability to a self-sustaining community” (Nocella, Bentley, & Duncan 2012, xvi). And in his concluding chapter, Nocella says that “green anarchists and primitivists argue that those who have disabilities, identified as the weak of society, will die off because of their lack of ability to survive in nature independent of technology and other people.” He claims that “green anarchists are advocating for a survival-of-the-fittest approach” and that “[t]hey promote a society that would fail to meet the needs of people with disabilities.” (Nocella 2012, 245). A.J. Withers, probably the most vehement voice in Earth, Animal, and Disability Liberation , has said that “disabled people are incompatible with the primitivist ideal,” that “anarcho-primitivism is fundamentally disableist,” and that “this oppressive ideology cannot be reconciled with notions of social justice” (Withers 2012, 121). Reaching a crescendo, Withers warns: “The primitivist ideal is one where disabled people have been killed…We need to be eliminated in order to create their Utopia” (Withers 2012, 120). The ableism charge of Nocella and Withers is a variation on a theme. It is a filled-in-version of a vitriolic charge made by the likes of Noam Chomsky and Murray Bookchin that anarcho-primitivists are genocidal eith…
