---
title: "For a Few Spits More"
author: "Un rétif"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/un-retif-for-a-few-spits-more"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Previously appeared as Pour quelques mollards de plus in Soleil noir (Bulletin apériodique anarchiste), Issue 2, May 2021 Translated for The Local Kids, Issue 7"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "un-retif-for-a-few-spits-more.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/un-retif-for-a-few-spits-more.epub"
    hosted: false
---

“This period that we entered created the need to rethink any revolutionary intervention, to understand the important changes that are at stake now, to grasp how new authoritarian mechanisms go together with older mechanisms to shape a world where the configuration of domination and exploitation becomes even more dense, conquers even more terrain.” - Un rétif, “J’irai cracher sur vos masques”, Soleil noir, Issue 1, July 2020 “What does this new life actually consist of, inspired by the catastrophist discourse in which some see the opportunity to create “a new humanism with Fukushima”, probably meaning a humanism that’s finally at the level of the human who’s totally submitted to their condition of survivor?” - Thierry Ribault, “Contre la résilience à Fukushima et ailleurs”, 2021 There we have it. It continues. New lockdown, new health emergency measures. It has been months that it lasts and it keeps going. The authorities confine and de-confine us according to their own interests, they order us or don’t to wear a mask, to fill in forms, they multiply the paradoxical orders. Most of the time when we go out on the street we don’t even know what we’re allowed to do or not. These measures leave us lost, dazed, in shock, isolated, atomised, broken by the monotonous and stifling repetition of our lives under sanitary constraint; metro, work, confinement! We have to make do, it’s now in the name of health and life that we’re disciplined and blamed. It’s in the name of health or environmental safety that the few freedoms that this society is still capable of promising us are cut down even more drastically. It’s the very nature of the catastrophist discourse. The last decades there has been a persistent attempt to impose this logic on us by some elites that have timely been won over by the environmental transition theories to extend more sustainably and effectively their domination. The catastrophe isn’t anymore – like it was for many years – denied, but on the contrary it has become inherent to our existence. It’s not anymore about avoiding disasters – that our societies mass-produce, but to live in the middle of the rubble, of the radio-active waste left by the nuclearists of the whole world and of the consequences of climate change that only a couple of fanatics still dispute. ** It’s hard to estimate what will last of this mass subjection when the epidemic recedes. A slowly absorbed and sustainable obedience or a reinforced distrust towards authority? Without a doubt a bit of both. What’s clear is that the experience is so total that it extends the shock wave to every fold of our lives. In the countryside, the real estate prices already shoot up, which will change lifestyles and landscapes. Everywhere everyone is called to withdraw into their personal sphere and the troika of work, family and economy (so dear to all authoritarian regimes) is making its big comeback. Every gesture is subject to increasingly invasive rules of behaviour. The traceability of beings is imposed in the name of life. The dematerialization of our relations and of work produces an increasingly distant world. Of course this disciplining of bodies and ideas isn’t applied everywhere and to everyone with the same strictness. Weekends at the countryside and holiday homes for the bourgeoisie, the hell of cramped apartments and bans on gatherings for the poorest… ** Does a society have to be paralysed with fear to treat its youth and the poorest as a criminal class? Parties and the smallest sparks of social life have been transformed in the span of some months into “endangering the life of others”. Does an era have to be out of promises when gathering and breaking the greyness of confinement becomes an offence? These are the essential crimes of a century that however doesn’t lack in real mass criminals: industries destroying lives, forests, lakes to plunder some rare minerals for the roll-out of the infrastructure for their global trade, predatory states bombing pop…
