---
title: "Fuck Around and Find Out"
author: "Flower Bomb"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fuck-around-and-find-out"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Obituary for Victimhood"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "fuck-around-and-find-out.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fuck-around-and-find-out.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Family, Community, and State: Illusions of Safety          The Family          The Community          The State        Violence vs Non-Violence: A False Dichotomy        Abolishing Victimhood        Fuck Around And Find Out America – the land of the free - where commercialized seasons greetings decorate the tarnished brass of senile happily-ever-after fairytales. A place where on any winter night a freezing alley could drain the warmth from a homeless body while a family somewhere else bathes in the luxurious spoils of upper-class materialism. For every noble consumer who separates their recyclables from trash, an oil tycoon continues ecological destruction with impunity. Violence permeates industrial society on a day to day basis – a routine of cold and calculated brutality hidden all around in plain sight. Beneath the duvet of bright and technicolorful convenience – fast food, high-definition plasma screens, iPhones etc. - a violent reality is suppressed out of focus. Out of sight, out of mind is the mantra for many who parade blissful ignorance. But unlike a fairytale that ends with a closed book and a kiss good night, human monsters dominate the landscape. Their primary mode of expression is warfare, social control, and brute domination - a language of human-centric progress like a nightmare without a dreamer to awaken. The violence of industrial society conceals itself within the layers of social deception and market manipulation - intentionally designed with carefully constructed imagery to portray a false sense of safety and positivity in the world: a blood diamond to symbolize love, bricks of cheese sold with the image of a laughing cow (a morbid irony that contrasts the reality of industrialized sexual assualt through restraining devices and forceful artificial insemination). The violence of human progress can be seen in the reflection of catastrophic oil spills and species extinction, widespread air pollution and top-soil degradation from agriculture and deforestation. Marine debris and acidification from plastic and other industrial waste toxify oceans and other bodies of water around the globe. And as if these things weren’t alarming enough, nanotechnology - the furthest advancement in the history of biotechnological progress – continues its exploration into manipulating and dominating the smallest biological elements. Nanontechnology has opened the door to capabilities including but not limited to carrying systems of social control directly into living bodies. And as with any other form of technological advancement, millions of non-human animals are taken from the wilderness and forced into laboratories for torturous testing and experimentation. All of this in the name of science – the ideological descendent of christianity – carrying with it the demand for mass worship and global expansion. Almost all of this done in classified secrecy, largely unknown to the general population. Under capitalism, safety is often prescribed in the form of censorship or concealment – an intentional information gap in order for the market to conceal the brutality of production. For example Ag-Gag laws created for the sole purpose of “gagging” potential whistleblowers and undercover vegan activists by punishing them for recording footage of animal agriculture. The market profits most from the consumer who is ignorantly safe from knowing exactly what happens behind the curtain – like the blood bath of animal cruelty in the name of human progress and supremacy. At the same time, secrecy is upheld with the help of distractions created by the products themselves. This includes social trends of new high-tech gadgets, genetically engineered food, weight loss solutions, and so on. Foxconn—one of the world's largest contract electronics manufacturers of Apple and HewlettPackard products – has suicide nets installed outside its buildings in response to its large number of workplace suicides. But in terms of social concern, the roar…
