---
title: "Articles from “Canenero”"
author: "Massimo Passamani, Marco Beaco, Alfredo M. Bonanno"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-articles-from-canenero"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Personal communication with the translator. Proofread text source from RevoltLib.com, retrieved on December 10, 2020. Published by Little Black Cart in book form"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-articles-from-canenero.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-articles-from-canenero.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Translator’s Introduction      Vagabond Destruction      The Technique of Certainty by Marco Beaco      The Obscure Clarity of Words by Alfredo M. Bonanno      The Reverse Road by Alfredo M. Bonanno      Streamlined Production by Alfredo M. Bonanno      A Eulogy to Opinion by Alfredo M. Bonanno      The Specter That Reassures as it Kills by Alfredo M. Bonanno      Continue to Speak to Me by Alfredo M. Bonanno      Anarchism and Criticism of the Existent by Benedetto Gallucci      A Yellow Rose by Alfredo M. Bonanno      The Persistent Refusal of Paradise by Penelope Nin      Prisoners of a Single World by Gruppo Anarchico Insurrezionalista “E. Malatesta”      Camomillo by Penelope Nin      He Jokes with Men by Penelope Nin      The Link That Isn’t There by Mario Cacciucco      A Little, Little Giant by Il Panda      Beyond the Law by Penelope Nin      The Rudiments of Terror      Poor Heroes      Communiqué From Prison      The Fullness of a Struggle Without Adjectives      A Missing Debate      Letter on Specialization      An Adventure Without Regrets Canenero was a weekly anarchist publication that came out in Italy between the end of 1994 and the beginning of 1997 with one break. This was when the Marini investigation against anarchists began to bear its rotten fruit in an attempt to imprison dozens of anarchists on charges of “subversive association” or membership in an “armed gang”. [1] One of the ideas behind Canenero was to provide a means for ongoing communication and discussion in the face of this repressive operation of the state. A substantial portion of the material in the paper dealt with the situation and the various anarchist responses to it. But the editors of Canenero were not willing to allow the repressive activity of the state to define the limits of the discussion in the paper they published, so along with information and analysis of that specific situation other significant questions and idea were raised in its pages. Thus, within its pages one could find pointed, but brief, theoretical articles, social and historical analyses and bitingly witty looks at the weeks news. Of course, as is appropriate for a weekly publication, most of the articles are specific to the time they were written, intended for immediate use in the heat of the situation that was going on. But there were enough articles of more general interest that I considered it worth my while to translate a number of them for publication in this form. I have already mad some of this material available in More, Much More , a collection of writings by Massimo Passamani whose ideas I find particularly thought-provoking, and The Fullness of a Struggle Without Adjectives , texts originally intended to stimulate a discussion about armed struggle groups that appeared in the last few issues of Canenero . In this booklet, I have collected a number of articles that I find particularly stimulating. I am certainly not in agreement with every word here. But I have found all of it to be a stimulus to deepening my own thinking on the sorts of questions raised. If, for example, Mario Cacciuco’s description of relationships between people as that of “spheres that bounce of each other” and his consequent rejection of the very idea of love and friendship seem rather bleak to me, this is precisely why his article provokes me to examine the nature of everyday relationships more closely, particularly those that we call “love” and “friendship”. In fact, one of the things that stands out for me in these articles is the way in which they are able to raise significant questions, often about matters that we take for granted, in so few words. I have chosen to print the material in chronological order. The first article was an introduction to the project and the last was the editors’ explanation for bringing the project to a close. In this last piece, the problems that confront any anarchist publishing project are made clear. As anarchists, hopefully, we do not publish…
