---
title: "Despotism or Democracy at Wits University?"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-despotism-or-democracy-at-wits-university"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The fight for a ‘Workers’ and Peoples’ University’ in a new South Africa in 2001"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-despotism-or-democracy-at-wits-university.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-despotism-or-democracy-at-wits-university.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       WHOSE COUNCIL?        COUNCIL AND THE RULING CLASS        WORKER REPRESENTATIVES?        INTERNAL REPRESENTATIVES        STUDENTS?        WITS 2001        REBELLING AGAINST WITS 2001        REPRESSION        RETRENCHMENTS        “SET” AND THE MARKET        MARKETISATION: THE “MARKET UNIVERSITY”        NEW ARCHITECTURE OF POWER        NORMA REID: SAME SUIT, DIFFERENT YEAR        WITS 2001 CONTINUA?        A WORKERS’ AND PEOPLES’ UNIVERSITY?        ALTERNATIVES        STRATEGIC LINE NOTE: the author was not a member of Keep Left. He spoke as an invited guest, in his capacity as an activist in the 1999–2001 struggle against privatisation and outsourcing; the talk is from the perspectives of the anarchist/ syndicalist tradition. SO, THE University of the Witwatersrand (Wits) has just selected a new Vice Chancellor (VC), Norma Reid. Reid promised, in her public address for the VC post, that her concern would be to deal with the “challenges of chronic disadvantage, oppression and poverty,” and to preserve liberty at the institution. This is very predictable. After all, who would apply for the Wits post on an openly neo-liberal agenda? Every member of the ruling class cries crocodile tears for the poor. When Trevor Manuel of the ruling ANC (African National Congress) cuts spending on basic services like health and education in the yearly Budget, he calls this a “People’s Budget.” When Tony Leon of the DA (Democratic Alliance) pledges that his party will put in place a 12-month programme for privatisation, if elected, he too, describes this as a favour to the working class. For Tony, this will lead to job creation and prosperity. So look beyond the rhetoric. There are two key issues to examine. One, how was the new Wits Vice Chancellor (VC) selected? Two, how will the new VC address the crucial issue, the privatisation of Wits? To understand the selection, and the role of the Wits VC, we must understand that Wits is a fundamentally undemocratic institution. It is governed, in the final instance, by a Council. According to the Higher Education Act of 1996, university councils must have 60% representation from outside “stakeholders,” and 40% from university constituencies. Historically the Wits council was dominated by big business, especially the mining and finance houses, in collusion with Wits’ senior management. Post-apartheid, there has been more concern to include other groups, but fundamentally Council remains dominated by representatives from big business, representatives from the state, and Wits’ senior management. The State has representatives from three levels: city, province and national, there to keep on eye on matters. State control is also ensured outside of Council by the simple fact that the state provides the main income to the university besides student fees. Business also has a large number of representatives, including representatives of capitalist “donors,” and business appointees by the Council. In short, Council is pretty much structured like everything in this society: it is ruled by the tiny economic and political elite –the ruling class to be quite blunt – and by and for that class. Obviously, we can and should expect big business, the private capitalists, to pursue an agenda of using Wits for their own ends. And the same goes for the state: no friend of the working class, the state elite of politicians, generals and directors is allied to the capitalists. Between these two wings of the ruling class – (private) capitalists and (state) managers – there is a deep alliance. One aims to accumulate capital, the other, land and people. And there basic interests coincide: each needs the other. A core part of this alliance – at the current moment – is a programme of privatisation and commercialisation and of cuts in spending on social services, codified in the neo-liberal GEAR (Growth, Employment and Redistribution strategy) programme. This is not a pro-worker state by any stretch of the imagination, nor can su…
