---
title: "A Crime Called Freedom: The Writings of Os Cangaceiros (Volume One)"
author: "Os Cangaceiros"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/os-cangaceiros-a-crime-called-freedom-the-writings-of-os-cangaceiros-volume-one"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Anarchist Library added the “Chapter” labels to format the PDFs. The Fire to the Powder Keg PDF is at eberhardtpress.org/pdf/ftpk.pdf | A Crime Called Freedom was published by Little Black Cart Landstreicher, W., anon, &amp; Cangaceiros, O. (2006). A Crime Called Freedom: The Writings of Os Cang"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "os-cangaceiros-a-crime-called-freedom-the-writings-of-os-cangaceiros-volume-one.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/os-cangaceiros-a-crime-called-freedom-the-writings-of-os-cangaceiros-volume-one.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Foreword        Introduction to Un Crimine Chiamato Libertà      Chapter 1. Chronology      Chapter 2. Editorial Notes From Os Cangaceiros #2        Slip the moorings!        The Universal History of Desperation        Fanatics of the Apocalypse        We, the Cangaceiros      Chapter 3. Prisoner’s Talking Blues      Chapter 4. Freedom Is the Crime That Contains All Crimes      Chapter 5. The Truth About Some Actions Carried Out In Support Of the Prison Revolts      Chapter 6. Nothing Human Is Achieved In the Grip Of Fear      Chapter 7. Industrial Domestication: Industry as the Origin of Modern Domination        Factories modeled after prisons        Imposing industrial logic        Savagery always returns        Puritans — scum        The Campaign to Civilize the Poor        Ready to Take to the Barricades      Chapter 8. “13,000 Escapes”: A Dossier Against the “Project 0f 13,000 Places”        Preamble      Chapter 9. Chronology and Correspondence of a Struggle Against French Prisons (April 1989-November 1990)        Letter Attached to the Dispatch of the Plans        About the Translator Os Cangaceiros was a group of delinquents with nothing but contempt for the self-sacrificial ideology practiced by “specialists in armed struggle”. This uncontrollable band of social rebels wreaked havoc on the French state by attacking the infrastructures of oppression, supporting popular revolts, stealing and releasing secret blueprints for high-tech prisons, raiding the offices of corporate collaborators, and creating their lives in complete opposition to the world based on work. This volume, translated by Wolfi Landstreicher, is the first collection of the writings of Os Cangaceiros in English. The book you are reading is a labor of love. I first saw a few translations of writings by the French group Os Cangaceiros about fifteen years ago. They were intriguing and I wanted to know more. It was clear that this was not another militant group of specialists in armed struggle. They had nothing but contempt for the self-sacrificial ideology and practice of militancy promoted by such groups. Several years later, I learned that Os Cangaceiros was a group comprised of delinquents who were caught up in the spirit of the French insurrection of 1968 — an insurrection that was not just a “student revolt”, as the media has tried to portray it [1] , but that encompassed the whole of French society. The group came together in Nice in 1968. Taking the well-known graffiti “Never work, ever!” to heart, they began creating their lives in opposition to the entire world based on work and thus constantly risked prison. They traveled all over Europe, participating in revolts throughout the 1970s and early 1980s. By the mid-1980s, their experiences with the judicial and prison systems led them to focus attacks there. Most of the material here relates to their anti-prison activity. I find the ideas they express particularly interesting because they combine the best aspects of a non-dogmatic (and non-workerist) class analysis with a critique of civilization that is not at all primitivist, forming a fierce theoretical weapon for use in the social war against the ruling order. Unfortunately, very few of the writings of Os Cangaceiros have been translated from French into English. Of these few translations, some seem rough, and others are mere excerpts, sometimes out of sequence. I do not know French, so I was pleased when some Italian comrades published Un Crimine Chiamato Libertà , a book which brings together a number of the texts relating to Os Cangaceiros’ anti-prison activity. In that book, it was mentioned that various anarchists had translated other material from Os Cangaceiros into Italian. I asked the Italian comrades to send me this material as well. The book you hold in your hands consists of all the texts that appeared in Un Crimine Chiamato Libertà (except the bibliography) and a few other texts that I felt would fit here. Some of the texts fr…
