---
title: "Democracy"
author: "Post-Comprehension"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/post-comprehension-democracy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This is the written version of Being’s Democracy video. The date is the video upload date. Link for the Democracy video: (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tSy77xvbf0o&amp;t) Link for the Fascism video: (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d6U8SAvTscs&amp;t) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tSy77xvbf0o&amp"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "post-comprehension-democracy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/post-comprehension-democracy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Part 1: People Rule        Part 2: Decisions and Proportions        Part 3: Popular Will and Mass Participation        Part 4: Anarchy vs. Kratos The Word Democracy comes from the Greek words, dēmos ‘people’ and Kratos meaning force, power, strength, or rule which is the most commonly interpreted meaning and so we get people’s Rule. Although, People’s power, People’s force, and people’s strength are possible interpretations but for now, let us stick to the interpretation that Kratos means rule. Now, who are these “people” and what is the “rule”? More specifically, how are they supposed to conduct a sense of rulership that exemplifies that of those people? Well, the framework of which can often be thought to encompass certain principles such as: Freedom of assembly, speech, inclusiveness, and equality. Membership: The actors involved serve as a type of membership, be it through citizenship in relation to a nation, or simply a member through involvement in the decision-making process. Consent, the people involved have agreed to the decision-making process. Voting, which can be taken as simply punching in a hole on a piece of paper or able to have standing in the decision-making process as an active unit in it. Those unable to vote would be the actors that cannot actively possess active influence in such processes. Right to life, the belief that a being has the right to live, and shouldn’t be killed by another entity. Minority Rights, can either mean rights to those in minority power standings or minority in relation to population or simply disagreement in relation to the majority. These are thought to guide the processes known as people rule, or simply democracy. The details of which and even the deepening meanings behind the notions of people’s rulership is extremely complex as the semantics behind which hold many implications and weights, many of which we will explore in the video. Many forms of democracy exist, in fact, too much for a video to cover, or at least for this video to cover, so we will be focussing on three major types and dissect them, asking whether these forms do in fact exemplify the people’s rule or are in fact exemplifying none of that. So in the previous part, we discussed the definition of the word democracy lightly, as no actual consensus exists as to what it really means and the possible principles encompassing them. The arguments on the exact meaning of people’s rule result in many different variations depending on how people have interpreted the incredibly vague notion. Arguments on: Who is allowed to participate? What are the criteria for participation in decision-making? Is it ethnic, religious, cultural, gender, tied to citizens, or open to all? How is authority shared amongst this participation? Do decision-makers vote on representatives who then create legislation or do the decision-makers vote directly on legislation? What is the mechanism that decides a decision? How do the decision-makers reach a decision? Is it through majority, supermajority, or consensus? The common three resulting democratic forms that come from these questions are: - Minoritarian Democracy, decision-making vested in a concentrated minority, be it representatives or limiting those that can participate in the decision-making process to a small segment of the population. - Majoritarian Democracy, as opposed to constitutional democracy, refers to democracy based upon the majority rule of a society’s citizens. - Consensus Democracy, a decision-making structure that involves and takes into account as broad a range of opinions as possible, as opposed to systems where minority opinions can potentially be ignored by vote-winning majorities. Firstly, Minoritarian Democracy is often justified through the notion of the “Tyranny of the Majority” and or the “Dumb Masses”, and so a centralized and external body is to mediate the decision-making process between the general population and legislation. This is the common framing behi…
