---
title: "Anarchism in East Germany (1945–1955)"
author: "Iztok"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jean-barrue-anarchism-in-east-germany-1945-1955"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Iztok (Paris), No 2, pp. 33–42. Translated by Paul Sharkey. Retrieved on 23rd May 2022 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jean-barrue-anarchism-in-east-germany-1945-1955.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jean-barrue-anarchism-in-east-germany-1945-1955.epub"
    hosted: false
---

When speaking of the anarchist movement in West Germany (FRG) or East Germany (GDR) in the post-war years we would do well to remember that anarchism was outlawed from 1933 to 1945: members of anarchist groups were arrested, murdered or sentenced to the lingering death of the concentration camp; the anarchist press vanished, and books and pamphlets were burned. So – for the few who survived – in 1945 anarchists had to begin all over again from zero and it was not long before authoritarian rule was established in East Germany and it employed the same methods vis à vis anarchists as the Nazi regime had. Between the 1890s and 1933, German anarchism had been split into a variety of strands which, with the odd exception, never managed to come together in an organisation based on a few basic principles to which all anarchists subscribed. Let us briefly outline the nature of those strands. INDIVIDUALIST ANARCHISM; Inspired by [Max] Stirner , this spread thanks to the writings of John-Henry MacKay (the philosopher-poet who ‘rediscovered’ Stirner and his work) and [Benjamin] Tucker. Individualist anarchist associations, Friends of Stirner and associations in favour of individualist culture were around in the 1920s, especially in Berlin and Hamburg. At present, the John McKay Society publishes the works of MacKay, Tucker, etc., as well as a series of anarchist studies that step outside the individualist framework proper. LIBERTARIAN SOCIALISM: Its spokesman was [Gustav] Landauer : anti-Marx and their heir to Proudhon, Landauer inspired the action of groups belonging to the Socialist Union, in order to create, outside of the parameters of state and capitalism, free communities of producers, the primary cells of a libertarian society. Landauer’s influence prior to 1914 made itself felt in Austria, Switzerland and even in France. In Israel, the construction of the kibbutzim drew inspiration from Landauer’s ideas. ANARCHO-COMMUNISM (or indeed libertarian communism): linked to the name of Johann Most (d. 1906) and drawing some inspiration from Bakunin and a lot from Kropotkin. [Erich] Mühsam was to pick up where Most left off and, at the time of the revolution in Munich in 1918, he set up the Union of Revolutionary Internationalists, and, ten years after that, the Anarchist Union, which was in competition with the Federation of Anarcho-Communists founded by [Rudolf] Oestreich . These two organisations vied with each other during the Weimar Republic and battled the rising tide of national-socialism, using different tactics. ANARCHO-SYNDICALISM: In a backlash against class collaborationist trade union and deference to the state, the anarcho-syndicalists launched the Union of Free Workers of Germany (FAUD) in 1919 and under the guidance of [Rudolf] Rocker , [Augustin] Souchy and [Arthur] Lehning , it grew into a mass organisation with about 125,000 members by 1923. The FAUD lost influence very quickly however and by 1933 its membership had fallen to between 25,000 and 30,000. “ANARCHIST” LIBERALISM: At the turn of the 20 th century, [Silvio] Gesell had tried to amalgamate economic liberalism and anarchism. After 1919, this movement was to spread under the influence of Zimmermann; it opposed authoritarian socialism and violent anarchism and strove – under the designation of “a-cracy” – to devise a synthesis of economic liberalism and individualist anarchism. This current of thought was to fall victim – as we shall see anon – to totalitarian rule in East Germany. By laying the stress of what divided them instead of what united them, the anarchists failed to arrive at a fraternal coordination of the various strands of anarchist thinking. There was, though, for a brief moment, a point at which all the strands worked together: during the first, short-lived councils Republic in Bavaria in 1919, before the communist seizure of power, swiftly followed by the dictatorship of the soldiery. Gesell, Landauer and Mühsam and the anarcho- syndicalists feature…
