---
title: "Feminism & Resistance to White Supremacy in Worker Organizing"
author: "Tamara K. Nopper"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tamara-k-nopper-feminism-resistance-to-white-supremacy-in-worker-organizing"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Reflections from the IWW Centenary"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tamara-k-nopper-feminism-resistance-to-white-supremacy-in-worker-organizing.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tamara-k-nopper-feminism-resistance-to-white-supremacy-in-worker-organizing.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What is the working class, or what are the ‘working classes’?        Glabermans’s idea of ‘the action of workers precedes consciousness’?        ‘Cross-race solidarity’ vs. the destruction of white supremacy: In June, I had the opportunity to attend the IWW Centenary in Chicago, two days of panels and lectures. About 200 people attended, and the first day was spent in lectures and panels discussing theory and history of working class issues and organizing; the second day was spent hearing about current reports of on-the-ground organizing work. I went primarily interested in questions of feminist praxis (theory and practice) and analysis of and resistance to white supremacy in workplace organizing. Here, I’ve included my initial questions and reflections that emerged from the experience. This question has long been stated as a question to grapple with. Specifically this came up in two manners. The first, in a recorded presentation by Mumia Abu-Jamal, as he spoke of the largest growing sector of the economy, that of service workers. The SEIU is now the largest union. Service workers typically do work that has been traditionally women, traditionally unwaged. Though now some of this work is being done by men (often immigrant men and men of color) it has still created a ‘sub-class’ of workers. So not only is the working class divided by race, but by gender and ideas of ‘feminized’ work as well. This has been called the ‘housewiferization’ of labor. The second time this question came up was the following week during an organizing meeting. During the meeting, one person was talking about organizing opportunities on a particular job-site. After careful discussion of his three co-workers (male) he suddenly remembered he had forgotten to include a dispatcher who worked separately in an office by herself. To explain the omission, he stated ‘well, she’s not really working-class. Her background is working in call-centers and offices.’ He was challenged by another worker saying ‘call center workers are working class’ to which he replied ‘yeah, but you all know what I mean. She talks differently; she’s just different than us guys here on the floor.’ More thoughts about this... In a changing economy, with a rapidly growing service sector creating a ‘subclass’ of workers, and the growth of a class of dead-end clerical jobs (previously considered ‘white collar’ clerks, and therefore not really working class), what does this mean for strategies of worker organizing that have previously defined ‘working class’ as point-of-production industrial workers? In addition, we have a class of very low-paid immigrant laborers with or without legal documentation (another subclass of workers working even minimum rights by law by so-called ‘legal’ workers) working in a number of industries from feminized service work (housekeepers) to agricultural work (food pickers) to food production and factory work. This class of workers is most vulnerable to police, INS, border cops, and at times can be the most militant sector of workers, having the least to gain by the current economic system and often emerging from cultural and political traditions with a history of struggle. It was asked at the conference, if strategies have previously been focused on dealing a blow to capital by stopping production, focused then on point-of-production workers and those workers transporting goods; how then do we make sense of the growth of these other sectors of low-wage, often women and immigrant workers? How does our strategy change to incorporate large numbers of workers excluded from point-of-production work? Also, how does a strategy originating in and focusing on workers in urban centers relate to workers in rural areas, where food is grown (or should be grown—if it’s not being grown by even lower-waged agricultural workers in other countries)? Though we may choose to promote a strategy that is urban-centered, we need to ask ‘where will our food come from?’ and how are t…
