---
title: "Anthropology: Want Some Anarchy With That?"
author: "Lawrence Jarach"
date: "2016"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lawrence-jarach-anthropology-want-some-anarchy-with-that"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "AJODA #61, Spring/Summer, 2006, vol. 24, no. 1 From AJODA #61"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lawrence-jarach-anthropology-want-some-anarchy-with-that.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lawrence-jarach-anthropology-want-some-anarchy-with-that.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A Short History of the Ugly Side of Anthropology        After Man the Hunter        What Anthropology Taught Me In 1983 I graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree in Cultural Anthropology. During that time the foremost school of thought in the field was—as it remains—the discourse that resulted from the pivotal Man the Hunter symposium that took place at the University of Chicago in 1966. This event created an upheaval in the world of the humanities; before then, the main idea in anthropology and other social sciences was that hunting for game was the defining social activity of primitive people [1] . In addition, most anthropologists still favored Hobbes’ “nasty, brutish, and short” picture of primitive life. This symposium changed all that. Since then, it is taken as a given (based on incontrovertible ethnographic evidence) that primitive people rely most heavily on plant and small animal foods (that can be easily gathered without hunting) [2] ; such cultures could more accurately be referred to as “gatherer-hunters” rather than hunter-gatherers (the first term emphasizes the method providing the most calories). The other mistaken idea attributed to primitive cultures was that gatherer-hunter people were constantly on the edge of starvation; Marshall Sahlins was instrumental in showing this fallacy with his submission “The Original Affluent Society.” While various challenges have been made to his idea that primitive people engaged in work [3] on average two to three hours per day, all who look at the data concur that primitive people work far less than any sedentary people, not to mention those of us who live in industrial and urban centers. It’s difficult today to appreciate the profound changes that resulted from the Man the Hunter symposium and the many articles and books that came out of it. This was a time of serious transformation of the field of anthropology, which until then had been a less-than-stellar social science in terms of positive contributions to the liberation of humanity. Early ethnographers had been missionaries, bringing the Gospels of Christianity and Economic Development to the “savages” of Africa and Asia (much like their colleagues had already been doing in the Americas). Others had been explicit harbingers of colonialism, advance reconnaissance men for European land-grabbers. Regardless of which prong of the attack, these ethnographers’ reports overflowed with the same racist assumptions about “the natives” as any government or company analysis. Despite themselves, however, the anthropologists engaged in fieldwork in the mid-to-late 19th century did manage to bring more or less accurate descriptions of primitive cultures to a Euro-American audience (both popular and academic, as well as official). Many were both astonished and embarrassed at what they found (much like the reports of Columbus finding the Taino overly welcoming, and therefore naive, knowing as he did what he had in store for them): cultures with no state, no centralized or institutionalized mechanisms of social control, no warfare. Yet there was obviously some kind of culture occurring. There was social cohesion based on clearly defined kinship patterns (and a near-universal incest taboo) as well as coherent worldviews based on culturally specific mythology and lore, songs and stories; ceremonies and rituals attached to lifecycle events (rites of passage associated with the attainment of adulthood, childbearing, death and mourning). These savages had culture—they weren’t just wandering around doing whatever they felt like; there were plenty of proscriptions as well as duties and obligations. This the ethnographers could not avoid describing. They were baffled that culture could exist without a complicated system of morality (that is, religion) or a putatively neutral institution for dispensing justice (that is, the State). They were, indeed, facing the fact that human culture could exist quite successfully without both. …
