---
title: "About Us, Our Activities, & Our Manifesto"
author: "Solidarity Collectives"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/solidarity-collectives-about-us-our-activities-our-manifesto"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2023-07-18 from &lt;solidaritycollectives.org/about_us&gt;; &lt;solidaritycollectives.org/en/manifesto-en&gt;; &lt;solidaritycollectives.org/en/main-page-english&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "solidarity-collectives-about-us-our-activities-our-manifesto.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/solidarity-collectives-about-us-our-activities-our-manifesto.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       About the Solidarity Collectives        Manifesto        Our Activities We, the Solidarity Collectives, are a group of Ukrainian anarchists who have united since the beginning of the Russian invasion to support our military comrades at the front and to help those affected by the Russian invasion. Our main goal is to provide the soldiers who have gone to the front with all the necessary equipment to increase their safety and effectiveness in resisting the Russian imperial invasion. Currently, we are supporting about a hundred anti-authoritarians. Since the beginning of the war, we have already managed to deliver 5 vehicles, 20 helmets, 30 armour, 50 first aid kits, 5 drones, 30 radios, 100+ sets of clothing, sights, equipment, active headphones and much, much more. The soldiers we support are activists of various movements: anarchists, human rights activists, trade unionists, eco-anarchists, anarcho-feminists, punk rockers, political refugees from Belarus and Russia, etc. Many of them might not have agreed with each other’s goals and ideas before the war. However, they were united by a common enemy, because the Russian imperial machine will not allow any of us to exist. We will remain united until the end of the war, until the last occupier leaves the territory of independent Ukraine. Our struggle is a struggle against colonial imperial politics, where the world order is dictated by whoever has the most weapons and oil deposits. We are fighting against false propaganda and hypocritical geopolitical compromises. We are fighting for a world order in which people choose their own path and development, and do not submit to the power of dictators. We are grateful for the help of all those who have not stayed away from our struggle. But the war continues, and every day we receive new requests for help from our soldiers, from socks to reconnaissance UAVs. So please support our resistance movement, a movement that has united people from all over the world, because we really need your help. “Solidarity Collectives” (former “Operation Solidarity”) is an anti-authoritarian volunteer network formed before the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine to help comrades on the frontline and civilians affected by the war. “Collectives” isn’t merely a name but the essence of our initiative which was joined by various organizations and groups from Ukraine, Germany, Poland, France, US, Netherlands, Canada, and many other countries. Based on our anti-authoritarian values, we decided to actively resist Russian aggression. We support the right of the Ukrainian people to self-defense and consider the Russian invasion an imperialist act. Despite the multidimensionality of any global event, the key reasons for this war are the imperial policy of the Russian Federation, the belief in the historical mission of the Russian elites, and an attempt to establish control over what they think is their sphere of influence. The reasons should not be sought neither in the economic interests of the Russian oligarchy nor in “Russian security precautions”, and especially not in NATO’s scheming. Full support of the Ukrainian people in their struggle (which doesn’t necessarily mean supporting the government’s policies) is the only consistent stance for anarchists and leftists worldwide. Ukrainians wage an armed struggle against Russia because there is no other way of effective resistance now. Classic pacifist recipes don’t work here because the sides of the conflict aren’t equal. If the Russian army surrenders, the war will end. If Ukrainian soldiers lay down their weapons or “turn them against their government”, as some ‘experts on Ukraine’ suggest, the Russian army will occupy more territories and commit more war crimes. Both solutions are equally unrealistic though. And reality requires practical answers and specific actions. On a big scale, Ukraine has no choice other than to defend itself with weapons. However, on the individual level, many Ukrainian men and w…
