---
title: "Chiefly a Dialogue. Concerning Some Difficulties of a Dunce."
author: "Louisa Sarah Bevington"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/l-s-bevington-chiefly-a-dialogue-concerning-some-difficulties-of-a-dunce"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: ""
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "l-s-bevington-chiefly-a-dialogue-concerning-some-difficulties-of-a-dunce.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/l-s-bevington-chiefly-a-dialogue-concerning-some-difficulties-of-a-dunce.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A DIALOGUE.        PLAYED OUT.        HOW IT’S DONE.        THE ANATHEMASIAN CREED.        WHO MADE THE CAKE?        FREEDOM, THE ANARCHIST, THE TORCH, & LIBERTY, Journals of Anarchist‐Communism.          FREEDOM PAMPHLETS. Dunce.— What is money? The Other Fellow.— Something rare and useless which you are compelled to obtain before anyone will let you get at things that are needful, useful and plentiful. Dunce.— Oh! Then, I suppose, if you have not got any money you had better leave off hoping for the plentiful things, and set to work to make what you want for yourself. Other Fellow.— Why, old man, you can’t! Dunce.— How's that? I feel as if I could. Other Fellow.— Not you. Money is there to stop you. It is a means used not only for making it difficult for you to get at what is ready‐made, but also for making it dangerous for you to start digging or planting, or making what you want for yourself. Dunce.— Then what on earth is money good for? Other Fellow.— Ah, that's where the joke comes in. Money is a device for enabling some people to get at whatever they want without paying for it. Dunce.— What is paying? Other Fellow.— Damaging yourself in some way: parting with what you are in need of; enduring something injurious; depriving yourself of health or strength or rest; spending more than your exertions can restore to you; impoverishing your life in some way. Money lets some people get all they want, and more too, by only damaging other people; so that they themselves are not required to pay at all. Dunce.— Oh, but I shouldn’t like to do that. Is there not enough of everything in this great big world for everyone to get at what they are in want of without damaging anyone? Other Fellow.— Yes; and now-a-days it can all be got at too. But, then, there's not money enough to go round; and as I said before, you are bound to get money before you will be allowed all wed to get at anything better, or even to make and use anything better, for yourself. And if no one gives you money which some one else has paid for, you will have to pay for some yourself. But whether you are one of the people who pay damage or no, when you have once got money enough away from other people, you can bribe anyone with it to let you have anything else you choose. Dunce.— What people are they who don't pay? Other Fellow.— Well, they have many names. They call themselves “noble” people, and “gentle” people; “upper” people, “higher” people, the “best” people, and so on. They speak of one another’s “majesty,” “highness,” “grace,” “holiness,” and “eminence”; and are addressed as “honorable,” “reverend,” “learned,” “worshipful”; and, in the absence of the other epithets, never miss getting themselves called “respectable.” Dunce.— What pretty names! Why do they call themselves all that? Other Fellow.— Their god only knows. (There are three Ms and an N in their god’s name. Aye! And he is in the know, too; and “has mercy on them, miserable sinners.”) But they only call themselves by fancy names when money is not being inquired about. When it is, and especially when they are thinking about the man in the street, they call themselves Sovereigns, Legislators, Owners, Employers, Pastors, Masters and Benefactors. And the man in the street is mostly careful to get well out of the way of their carriages‐and‐pairs before he has the cheek to nickname them Bosses, Exploiters, Sweaters, Parasites, Loafers and Frauds. They are all men of means , that’s why. Dunce.— What is a man of means? Other Fellow.— I told you before: men with money enough to procure necessaries, comforts, luxuries, leisure and pleasure without paying for them and entirely at other folk’s expense; and then to force these folks to put up with them. Dunce.— But don’t people pay for what money they have? Other Fellow.— Some do; some don’t. Dunce.— Who have the most money; the people who pay for it, or the people who don’t? Other Fellow.— The people who don’t. They are called “rich” people, because they ge…
