---
title: "The Federacion Anarquista Uruguaya (FAU)"
author: "Maria Esther Gillo, Paul Sharkey, Hugo Cores, Jaime Prieto, Juan Carlos Mechoso"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/paul-sharkey-the-federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-fau"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Crisis, Armed Struggle and Dictatorship, 1967–1985"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "paul-sharkey-the-federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-fau.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/paul-sharkey-the-federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-fau.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     What is Anarchism?      Uruguay – Background      The FAU      “ Anarchists had more of a stomach for the fight”: Interview With Juan Carlos Mechoso [2001]      Juan Carlos Mechoso      Santa (El Santa Romero) El Santa Romero      Jaime Prieto, Rebel      Ruben ‘Pepe’ Prieto      What Would I Value About My Experience With The FAU?      Roberto Franano      Alberto Marino      OPR-33 (Organizacion Popular Revolucionaria-33)      Idilio de León      Roberto Larrasq El Vasco (The Basque)      24 July 1971: The Killing Of Heber Nieto aka El Monje      Uruguayan Anarchist Gerardo Gatti (1931–1976?)      Labels      The FAU version of story of the Seral dispute and Molaguero kidnapping [as published in Lucha Libertaria ]        The demands put to Molaguero senior      A Letter from Prison by Alberto Mechoso Mendez aka Pocho (1936–1976)      The FAU: Fifty Years In The Fight For Socialism And Freedom        The Foundation of the FAU        Underground organisation, direct action and the armed wing        The FAU today Anarchism is a political theory which opposes the State and capitalism. It says that people with economic power (capitalists) and those with political power (politicians of all stripes left, right or centre) use that power for their own benefit, and not (like they claim) for the benefit of society. Anarchism says that neither exploitation nor government is natural or necessary, and that a society based on freedom, mutual aid and equal shares of the good things in life would work better than this one. Anarchism is also a political movement. Anarchists take part in day-to-day struggles (against poverty, oppression of any kind, war etc) and also promote the idea of comprehensive social change. Based on bitter experience, they warn that new ‘revolutionary’ bosses are no improvement: ‘ends’ and ‘means’ (what you want and how you get it) are closely connected. The FAU (Federación Anarquista Uruguaya), founded in 1956, was one on the strongest anarchist movements in Latin America. In the 1960s, it faced a rising tide of repression which would culminate in the military dictatorship of 1973–85. As legal avenues of struggle were closed down, through the Worker-Student Resistance (ROE) and OPR-33 (People’s Revolutionary Organisation) it expanded its tactics to include armed struggle in defence of the workers movement. Banks were raided for funds, and factory bosses were kidnapped in support of workers’ demands. After Argentina became a military dictatorship in 1976, many FAU militants there were ‘disappeared’ in joint repression by the Uruguayan and Argentine armed forces. Elements of the FAU were fundamental in the creation of the People’s Victory Party (PVP). The FAU is still active today. The republic of Uruguay – originally referred to as the Banda Oriental (Eastern Strip) on the eastern bank of the River Plate, with Argentina on the western bank – had its first ever labour congress in 1896. But 1900 there were 28 unions active in Montevideo and another 11 in the provinces. Immigration from Europe after 1880 brought a range of ideas about social change and the anarchist FORU (Uruguayan Regional Workers’ Federation) was launched in 1905. Under President Batlle y Ordoñez, a system of social security and labour legislation was introduced. In 1915 Uruguay legislated the 8-hour day into existence. In the 1940 there was a huge upsurge in unionisation, chiefly among the textile workers, railwaymen, dockers, construction workers and meat-packers. The period 1940–1955 was referred to in Uruguayan history as the “fatted calf” years: between 1948 and 1954, the cost of living rose by 58% but the wages of workers across 31 trade unions grew by 110%. Uruguay has a relatively liberal ruling class and the country was often referred to as the ‘Switzerland of Latin America’. By the 1950s the economic situation had taken a turn for the worse. The agricultural sector began to stagnate, adding to pressure on the welfare state funded by the e…
