---
title: "The Elephant in the Room"
author: "narcissus"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/immerautonom-the-elephant-in-the-room"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "What “Anarqxista Goldman” can Teach Us About the Anarchist Movement, Sexual Freedom, and Sexual Violence"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "immerautonom-the-elephant-in-the-room.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/immerautonom-the-elephant-in-the-room.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Part 1: The Bright Flame and the Ghost of Emma Goldman        Part 2: “Rumors of My Death Have Been Greatly Exaggerated (By Me)”        Part 3: Andrew Lloyd: Serial Sexual Predator        Part 4: Anarchy, Feminism, and Reaction          Why did Lloyd kill off the Anarqxista persona?          How did multiple reputable anarchist organizations fail to notice they were publishing a pedophilia manifesto?          How was Andrew Lloyd able to pass himself off as an “anarcha-feminist” among anarchists, who ought to know what anarchist thought does and does not accord with?        Part 5: The Elephant in the Room, or: We Have a Fucking Problem          The Scope of the Problem          The Nature of the Problem          The Crux of the Problem, or: Why Andrew Lloyd? Why Now? Anarqxista Goldman — self-named after Emma Goldman — was (allegedly) an anarcha-feminist sex worker, writer, and activist who used the handle @Anarqxista on twitter. On January 9, 2023, Anarqxista Goldman’s private twitter account posted the tragic news of her heroic and dramatic death, having intervened to defend a woman from her abusive boyfriend and been stabbed repeatedly. “Words cannot express how distraught and heartbroken we are to have lost this bright flame who came to us at the Nude House just less than one year ago,” read the notice. Individual users and anarchist organizations online immediately began posting heartfelt goodbyes eulogizing “Anarqxista” as well as circulating her obituary, published shortly after the death notice alongside her last writings, written by her ostensible comrades at The Nude House, a “free love commune” where she (allegedly) lived. Curiously, the obituary and final works became fixated on defending the right of adults to have sex with children partway through. (This is not typical of most obituaries I have read, although I suppose perhaps there is a grand tradition of praising the radical liberation of fucking teenagers in obituaries that I am unaware of.) The full document and “last writings” closed by quoting Hakim Bey at length. And then, on January 11, 2023, anarchist Håkan Geijer, acting on behalf of a group of anarchist researchers, posted a thread on mastodon documenting the evidence that, in fact, Anarqxista Goldman had never existed, and had actually been a catfish persona adopted by a 54-year-old white cis heterosexual British pedophile [1] and Bible Studies major. The original thread can be read on Mastodon but it has been reproduced (with minor edits for formatting) below. All emphasis is mine. This is a thread about the persona Anarqxista Goldman, AKA Dionysia Exarchopoulos and other variations on those names. She was not killed two days ago in a knife fight as claimed by her twitter account because she never existed in the first place. She is a fabrication by Andrew Lloyd, AKA Dr. eXistenZ. In 2020, a supposed 25-year old sex worker living in a so-called “Nude House” commune of free love in Southern Europe appeared online and began writing books. Her career came to an end when she supposedly died defending a woman from a domestic violence attack on 10 January 2023. The only problem is that Anarqxista Goldman never existed. Instead Andrew Lloyd or Dr. eXistenZ created her as a fantasy of his mind in 2020 after bemoaning how middle-aged cis white men are never respected or listened to. To decrease confusion, we’ll be sticking predominantly with the pronoun “they.” This is the post that announced their “death”: https://raddle.me/f/Anarchism/150617/anarqxista-has-died-a-great-soul-has-left-earth On The Anarchist Library, you find the entry for The Nietzschean Anarchist, https://archive.is/Vfiej , which links to the Dionysia Exarchopouos archive[.]org page ( https://archive.org/details/anarchy-and-anarchisms ) and the full piece “Anarchy and Anarchisms” by Dionysia Exarchopoulos. [2] Before 2020, Goldman predominately wrote under then name Dionysia Exarchopoulos, having returned from Germany to the UK and le…
