---
title: "7 FAU Letters and Two Trade Union Documents"
author: "Uruguayan Anarchist Federation"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/uruguayan-anarchist-federation-7-fau-letters-and-two-trade-union-documents"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 9th August 2023 from www.anarkismo.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "uruguayan-anarchist-federation-7-fau-letters-and-two-trade-union-documents.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/uruguayan-anarchist-federation-7-fau-letters-and-two-trade-union-documents.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Preamble      SOME CRITERIA FOR WORK AT THE MASS LEVEL (1)      SOME CRITERIA FOR THE WORK AT THE MASS LEVEL. (2)        1.        2.        3.      BEWARE OF DETOURS, THE FOCUS IS ON THE STRUGGLE.      SOME CRITERIA FOR WORK AT THE MASS LEVEL (3)      SOME CRITERIA FOR WORK AT THE MASS LEVEL. (4)      SOME CRITERIA FOR WORK AT THE MASS LEVEL (5)      THE LONG MARCH TOWARDS THE POWER OF THE PEOPLE.      LETTER TO THE CNT      THE THREE “F” DOCUMENT        INTRODUCTION        THE JUNE 27TH COUP        THE STRIKE AND ITS DEVELOPMENT.        LESSONS FROM THE STRIKE        THE CURRENT SITUATION        PERSPECTIVES        ORGANISATIONAL ASPECTS We present these texts which are relevant in several ways. On the one hand, “7 letters from FAU” which talk about the importance and decisiveness of the Political Organisation in the struggle, where it is stressed that it is not possible to aspire to a revolutionary outcome of the political accumulation of the popular struggles without such a specific organisation. Political organisation which is not a vanguard but a driving force which pushes and contributes to the popular struggles, but which has as its mission an important area of specific tasks to develop in a process of such characteristics. These texts date from around 1968 to 1970 and in them we will see these concepts clearly expressed, through the sieve of the language of that time. Secondly, two “tendency” materials are published, both at trade union and student level, setting out the need to deepen the struggle and also explaining what the unity of the trade union movement is for and what role a student tendency should play. We hope that both materials will be useful to anarchist comrades all over the world. Health and Up with those that Struggle! History has no second parts, neither good nor bad, they are acts, some recurrent and others merely circumstantial. What is useful to us is the teaching it leaves us, the general elements that allow us to visualise some degrees of succession of current events. It gives us the possibility of being incidents, if we are moved by an ideological impulse of transformation, within a delimited framework, but no more. Even at this point, it shows itself to be implacable, with the implacability of the passage of time. It brings with it a series of elements that do not allow us to make an easy, pretentious and superb manipulation of it... Within these considerations these materials appear as material for the study of the actions within the popular movement and its organisational forms. It keeps a distance from what has to do with formulas of solutions in society, which today is presented in a totally different way. It contains referential elements, ideas, experiences and historical facts that allow us to be incidentals. Each reader can take charge of his or her own conclusions, although in this case it is material to be objectified and converted into a positive element of social and economic transformation. Mass actions and armed struggle, trade union mobilizations and direct action, had a constant and permanent presence during the period of the end of the 60s. Mass actions that meant a political deepening, ranging from economic, social and political demands to actions that meant direct confrontations with the repressive forces. Development, for example, of an armed struggle that implied a greater technical capacity and a further deepening of the people’s struggle. But within a framework in which at no time should the aspiration to a socialist society, to that of a more just and united society, be left. The materials offered, the first dating back to 69, Pacheco already had a long history of government with security measures that had involved closures of newspapers, closure of political organizations, prisoners in prisons and barracks and another series of outrages. The legal dictatorship he was promoting was in full swing, with a parliament functioning with all parties. Unemployment, attempts …
