---
title: "Against The New World Order"
author: "Rob los Ricos"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rob-los-ricos-against-the-new-world-order"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "from Green Anarchist #66 Retrieved on Januray 1, 2005 from www.greenanarchist.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rob-los-ricos-against-the-new-world-order.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rob-los-ricos-against-the-new-world-order.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Post-S11 Postscript The death of Carlo Guiliani during the protests against the G8 summit in Genoa shocked many people in the First world. Carlo was assassinated by the militarized police forces of the New World Order, whose outright fascist nature was made clear when Guiliani’s arrested comrades were forced to pay homage to Il Duce in words and song by the Italian security forces. To the starry-eyed bourgeois activists in north America and Europe, Carlo’s death was a horrible travesty of justice against a movement to democratise global capitalism. To people in the South — the ‘developing’ or ‘underdeveloped’ lands — such assassinations are neither unusual nor unexpected. There has been a war raging over control of the Earth’s resources for a century (or more) and the fight to create a global corporate state — the New world Order by Bush I — is only the latest phase, one which has claimed dozens (Mexico, India), hundreds (Papua New Guinea), thousands (Columbia, Nigeria), even millions (Democratic Republic of the Congo) of lives around the world. Sadly, it’s only when these deaths occur in the presence of First World media and other witnesses that they register any sort of reaction at all. The stakes in this conflict are extraordinarily high. On one side are the megawealthy who wish to preserve the protected enclaves of privilege and material ease industrial society creates for them. In their way are the other 6 billion people on Earth, who the ruling elite wish to cast aside to fend for themselves in the waste and ruin industrialism continues to make of the world. Limited privileges are granted to the bourgeois and workers so they will tolerate the death dealt out to provide these privileges. For instance, the people of Africa being slaughtered to provide oil and cell phones for consumers. Will consumers in the First World give up gasoline and wireless communication devices in order to relieve the suffering of other, distant, dark-skinned people? Not willingly or they would already have done so. Many of the people involved in the anti-globalisation movement aren’t interested in or even aware of the plight of these other people. All they want is a better deal — a greater share of the profits raked in by the plundering of foreign lands. Their wildful naivete about how the post-capitalist world works is obscene. But to cut them some slack, there us an ongoing conspiracy by the shapers of society to prevent us from realizing the continuous efforts of the ruling elites to divide us so that we’ll gladly annihilate one another in order to maintain the illusions described as “capitalism” and “democracy”. World War One was an effort by the ruling elites of the industrialised nations to divide the world into permanent have and have-not nation states and spheres of influence for the colonial powers. It also allowed them to crush the international solidarity rampant among the workers. One of the war’s chief apologists, US president Woodrow Wilson, described it as an effort to make the world safe for democracy. What he actually meant was that the natural resources of the world would be made available for the benefit of the industrialised nations. Their attempt was only partially successful, so the attempt was repeated in the war over fascism (WWII) and further refined during the subsequent Cold War. What the elite learned from their experiments were: propaganda campaigns could manipulate the people within industrialized societies to leap to their deaths unquestioningly, upon command a modern society will accept death camps, as long as “other [minority] people” were being exterminated no atrocity committed against a civilian population is inexcusable, especially if the media and government act like it never happened. Having learned this throughout the course of the 20 th century, the ruling elite were ready to implement the New World Order. I could see the clubs ... at their work. Their ends were smeared with blood, and blood sprayed…
