---
title: "Beaubourg: Future Cancer?"
author: "Jacques Camatte"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jacques-camatte-beaubourg-future-cancer"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Jacques Camatte, “Beaubourg et le cancer du futur,” mars 1977; “Beaubourg: Future Cancer?,” Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed, Fall/Winter 1997–1998, pp. 52–55"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jacques-camatte-beaubourg-future-cancer.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jacques-camatte-beaubourg-future-cancer.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Whether as a trick, a diversion, or core-work within a well-established project, the Beaubourg Cultural Center occupies a point where a number of phenomena converge. Its existence is significative of the transformation of the community of capital. All that cannot be considered here. I will restrict myself to pointing out some fundamental parallels between art and capital. [1] Art developed at the moment when human beings were separated from their community. There was no art in the long prehistory preceding that event. The term isolates the materialization of a cognitive means for people to represent their world, from which they weren’t separated. It was part of a nonabstracted knowledge, that is, not presented solely through abstraction, as occurred later. It was what Leroi-Gourhan called a drifting knowledge: [2] a radiant, multidimensional thought in sympathy with its surroundings, since the break hadn’t yet occurred. So, in contemporary terms, this art was simultaneously language, science, magic, ritual, etc. At the same time it was part of a whole that it recognized and to which it gave signification. After the break art was to become the means for recreating the old community, the “Lost Totality.” With the loss of immediate coherence, art was the mediation reestablishing communication. This search for the lost community is clear in Greek theater, opera, cinema, and the attempts to realize total art (even in happenings), even if it no longer appears in such terms to those doing them. It’s not just art as the sum of the artistic actions trying to reaffirm a whole, it’s each particular art that rushes into this endeavor. It’s as if each wanted to reorder the whole and reform it from itself, involving a reconstitution from a certain viewpoint and understanding; for linearization began as soon as the “radiant phenomenon” was destroyed, because of the break and the autonomization of the parts constituting the original whole. Attempts at reconstitution failed to stop this, since they began from a separated part. It’s impossible to catapult oneself straight into another community. But it’s the only starting point for rediscovering radiant thought. Nostalgia for lost community is most obvious at times of appearance of art derived from opposition between two moments in human history in a well-determined area. Examples are the oppositions between matriarchy and patriarchy [3] in Greek tragedy, and feudalism and nascent bourgeois society returning to the old models (Renaissance). A common characteristic is that it’s the defeated parts that produced art (such as provincials or American southerners), as if art is all the more glorious when attached to something irredeemably lost. So for some art would be a consolation for the defeated, ignoring its affirmation not of the defeat but of creation or maintenance of a possibility, a refusal of the diktat of realism and the reality principle. Secularization happens at the same time. Loss of the sacred leads art to take nature as its model. In reaction it is equally the place of its conservation. The heresies have survived through art. At the time of capital’s formal domination over society, art could remain outside it and accomplish its anti-bourgeois function. As it happened, it was anticapitalist, for the bourgeoisie historically needed art to impose itself on the world, as it was a class that exalted it. This opposition continued until the attempt by the Dada movement to link up with the revolution then occurring in Germany. This simultaneously admitted that no separated activity could reorganize a totality or be a starting point for another community. Nonetheless artists at that time showed more insight than revolutionaries, [4] because their proclamation of the death of art was linked to their perception of the end of a world, the old bourgeois society, because of the passage from formal to real domination of capital, which occurred over several years (notably 1914–45). At the turn of t…
