---
title: "The Argentine Republic and English Radical Reformers"
author: "John Creaghe"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-creaghe-the-argentine-republic-and-english-radical-reformers"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First published and serialised in Commonweal, (4, 11, &amp; 18) January 1890 Retreived on 4 June 2024 from https://www.marxists.org/history/international/social-democracy/commonweal/1890/index.htm"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-creaghe-the-argentine-republic-and-english-radical-reformers.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-creaghe-the-argentine-republic-and-english-radical-reformers.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The writer of the following pages, having lived for many years in the Argentine Republic, where, almost from the establishment of its independence, the whole so-called Radical programme of this country has been in practice, wishes to point out how utterly useless all political reforms are while economic conditions are opposed to freedom. This they will see by a plain statement of facts as to what has fallen under the writer’s own notice in the Republic. But first I must show how thoroughly ‘free’ the country is in a political sense. You have, in the first place, a republic modelled after the United States, with a fine free Constitution (on paper), which declares all men free and equal, and the rest of it. Then you have universal suffrage for all native-born citizens, or foreigners who choose to be naturalised, which these latter very seldom do, there being a very great advantage in not possessing a vote, as I shall prove further on. Then you have vote by ballot, and an arrangement by which minorities shall be secured representation. You have free education in public schools. Land is free, and is sold freely in the market like any other commodity. There is no law of primogeniture, a man’s property being divided equally among all his children if he dies without making a will, and if he makes one the law only allows him to dispose of a small percentage away from them. Again, every Province – which corresponds to ‘State’ in the United States – has its own executive, ministers, Senate, and House of Representatives, but no house of hereditary legislators as in England. There is no Ireland there to lift a Parnell into popularity or power for his noble efforts in her cause, or a Grand Old Man verging on eighty years of age who has suddenly found out the justice of it. The members of these legislative bodies are all paid, and paid well; and every five years is a fresh election (more’s the pity). All this we have, and more also; and yet in that favoured land the rights and feelings of the poor are trampled on by the rich and powerful in a way which would be incredible except to one who, like myself, has seen it with his own eyes. The right of suffrage, also, far from being an advantage, has been and is a dreadful disadvantage to the poor man possessing it. In the year 1871 I landed in Buenos Ayres, in the month of July, and the month of October I started with an expedition of English engineers to cross the Pampa to Chile and survey a line of railway then projected Mr. Robert Crawford, a well-known civil engineer, was chief of the expedition, and it was considered to be a difficult and dangerous work, owing to the line running through country continually traversed by the Indians, the personnel was numerous, and a medical officer was required, which appointment I received. The starting-point was Chivilcoy, the then most westerly point of the western railway of Buenos Ayres, and there we were informed we should find carts, cattle, and peons (native labourers) waiting for us. And sure enough there they were, particularly the peons, who had been carefully lodged in jail pending our arrival! On enquiry, Mr. Crawford was informed that it was the usual thing to do in such cases, as otherwise these free citizen-voters might repent and give up their engagement. Does this seem incredible? No doubt it does; and it was very surprising to us, who had just come from a benighted country where universal suffrage and republicanism were unknown; but you will find by the sequel that such treatment of our peons is merely typical of what the class receives in all respects and on all occasions. Mr. Robert Crawford, after his return to England, published a book, ‘Across the Pampa and the Andes,’ in which he relates the history of the expedition, and in which will be found mention of the circumstance I have just stated. I found it particularly strange myself, as I had a short time before terminated a three years’ residence in the United States, and believed at …
