---
title: "The Confederation as the Commune of Communes"
author: "Sixtine van Outryve, Debbie Bookchin"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/debbie-bookchin-sixtine-van-outryve-the-confederation-as-the-commune-of-communes"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "ROAR Magazine, Issue 9. Retrieved on 2020-03-24 from roarmag.org."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "debbie-bookchin-sixtine-van-outryve-the-confederation-as-the-commune-of-communes.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/debbie-bookchin-sixtine-van-outryve-the-confederation-as-the-commune-of-communes.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Importance of Confederalism to a Grassroots Democracy        The Confederation as a Means: Establishing Dual Power        The Confederation as an End: Making Direct Democracy Possible        Delegates Versus Representatives        Confederal Structures Today          Democratic Confederalism in Rojava          The Gilets Jaunes’ Assembly of Assemblies          Symbiosis: towards a confederation of municipal movements in North America        Challenging the Hegemony of the Nation-State Confederalism as a revolutionary strategy provides us with the means to build and organize a radically democratic and egalitarian society at scale. In 1936, at the apex of the Spanish Revolution, hundreds of Spanish villages, towns, neighborhoods and factories had organized themselves into collectives in which local residents made decisions about labor and the distribution of resources. For a splendid few months, these workers’ and peasant assemblies and their committees took charge of nearly one third of Spain. They help to organize every aspect of political and social life: agricultural production, local administration, munitions and how to feed their people. While each community had a great degree of autonomy, they also cooperated informally, sometimes holding general assemblies that covered more than 1,000 families across 15,000 square kilometers. Like the French revolutionaries of the sectional assemblies of 1793 and the Paris Commune of 1871, which called for a nationwide Commune of Communes, the fiercely democratic anarchists of Spain understood that to maintain their autonomy, any decision-making body had to be directly accountable to the communities from which they derived their power. These popular assemblies and their empowerment of ordinary people were coordinated through an important process: confederation, also known as confederalism. By coordinating collective will through a confederal council, the confederation allows for the organization of political life over a large territory and a large population in a directly democratic way. Confederation (sometimes called co-federation or federation to avoid any association with the racist project of the Southern Confederacy) also presents a radically different logic from that of the nation-state. As a structure for organizing society that enables the non-sectarian co-existence of different races, ethnicities and religions, the confederation places itself in direct opposition to the nation-state’s project of “unity” and homogeneity of the people. The ability to organize direct democracy at scale, while preserving its fundamental principles of political equality and the accrual of popular power to every member of society, is the reason we must turn to confederalism as our revolutionary strategy. Throughout modern history, revolutionary self-governing organizations and communities have bound together against the forces oppressing them using the model of confederation. Whether the revolutionary sectional assemblies forming the ancestor of the 1871 Paris Commune during the French Revolution, the Congress of Soviets during the early days of the 1917 Russian Revolution or today’s democratic confederalism in the Kurdish-led northern Syrian region of Rojava, revolutionary movements have found in confederation both the strategic vehicle for their emancipation and the ability to realize the liberated institutions of self-rule to which they aspire at a large scale. Under confederalism, a network of delegates are elected from popular assemblies, the face-to-face gatherings at which every member of a community is able to speak, propose, debate and deliberate about the issues facing their neighborhood and region. It allows these popular assemblies to connect with each other through a system of delegation: delegates who are strictly mandated to communicate the wishes of the assembly for which they speak — not to make decisions on their own — a critical distinction between confederalist organiza…
