---
title: "Communalism"
author: "Stephanie Amargi, Marcus Amargi"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/marcus-amargi-stephanie-amargi-communalism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Liberatory Alternative"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "marcus-amargi-stephanie-amargi-communalism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/marcus-amargi-stephanie-amargi-communalism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction      Ecological Ethics      Hierarchy      Capitalism      The State      Freedom in History      Social Freedom      Direct Democracy      Liberatory Technology        Manufacturing        Mining        Agriculture        Energy      Ethical Economy      Urban Decentralization      From Here to There      Conclusion      Resources        Introductory Readings        Digging in Deeper        Biographies        Groups & Supportive Websites      Copyleft The belief that what currently exists must necessarily exist is the acid that corrodes all visionary thinking. Murray Bookchin Communalism is the all encompassing term given to a comprehensive theory and practice that seeks to reconstruct society along ecological lines. It is based in the essential premise that all environmental problems are rooted in social problems. Along with global climate change, problems such as widespread pollution, deforestation, and species extinction are all anthropogenic in their source. Assessing these issues as a whole, we can see that our society is simplifying the environment on a global scale. In fact, it is undoing the achievements of evolution by creating a more simplified, inorganic world. [1] Communalism holds an objective set of social ethics that reflect the most developmental trends in evolution, including greater choice, dynamic stability, and diversity. Supported by these ecological trends, Communalism provides a foundation to act against injustice, domination, and hierarchy, which are neither “natural” nor inevitable features of society. These ideas also works within a historical framework that recognizes that society has not always maintained the irrational form that we live in today. Communalism asserts that an ideal of freedom has expanded throughout history in opposition to the development of hierarchy and domination. To build upon these emancipatory efforts, a reconstructive vision is provided of an ecologically harmonious society that is free from all forms of hierarchy. This pamphlet is primarily focused on discussing this reconstructive vision, as well as exploring practical steps for engaging in an educational and political process that can bridge where we are today with the society we hope to achieve. Readers interested in learning more about Communalism’s philosophical and anthropological underpinnings should turn to the Resources section. Communalism holds a set of social ethics that reflect the developmental trends in evolution. An objective ethics, meaning an ethics rooted outside the ambiguities of our imagination and perceptible to all, is important because it provides us with a set of principles from which to counter injustices and to guide our efforts for a truly free society void of any form of domination. To begin, let us first define what is meant by “nature.” Nature is the history of its own development over millions of years. This cumulative development incorporates its past and continuously reaches into a broader, yet unified, diversification of species. Humans, no less than any other species, are a part of nature. The emergence of humanity introduced a new realm in to nature, a social nature. This species’ transcendence of instinctual behavior, and its ability for reflective thought and action was a significant expansion in comparison to the evolution of mind elsewhere in nature. Along with this freedom comes the ability to contribute in a beneficial manner toward both non-human and social nature, or to go against natural processes, as is found within hierarchical relationships. [2] Many people believe that hierarchy exists in non-human nature, but this belief is inaccurate. Hierarchy is an institutionalized system of command and obedience. An institution is a set of social relationships that are neither determined by instinct nor idiosyncratic, and which can be liberating or dehumanizing. They are organized, fairly stable, alterable, and continuous over generations. Hierarchy was created by hu…
