---
title: "Anarchism in the Philippines"
author: "Mindsetbreaker Press"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mindsetbreaker-press-anarchism-in-the-philippines"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "uncomradelybehaviour.wordpress.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mindsetbreaker-press-anarchism-in-the-philippines.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mindsetbreaker-press-anarchism-in-the-philippines.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Comrades from the far east on the burgeoning anarchist scene there        Project description        Taking a glimpse        Aims and goals        Current activities Much is made of the historical connections between anarchism and the Philippines. Not least from the formidable work of Benedict Anderson and his book Under Three Flags which documents the relationship between anarchism and anti-colonialism filtered through the life and works of Jose Rizal, one of the leading figures in the Filipino independence struggle in what Anderson describes as “that dense intertwining of anarchist internationalism and radical anti-colonialism”. The political activist and novelist José Rizal, who was executed in 1896 by the Spanish authorities in the Philippines at the age of 35, along with his contemporary, the pioneering folklorist, labour activist and writer Isabelo de los Reyes were a major influence on anarchist ideas being brought to the islands. De los Reyes was imprisoned in Manila after the violent uprisings of 1896 and later deported to Spain where he was incarcerated, together with Catalan anarchists, in the infamous Montjuic Castle prison in Barcelona. It was there de los Reyes met and befriended the anarchist Ramon Sempau. On his return to Manila in 1901, now under US occupation, he brought with him books by Proudhon, Marx, Kropotkin, and Malatesta. Shortly after, he organised print workers and successfully held strikes, imbuing them with anarcho-syndicalist ideas that led to the creation of the Union Obrera Democrática (UOD) in 1902. It was the first modern trade union federation in the country and its founding congress adopted the principles of two books – Life and Works of Karl Marx and Among Farmers by Errico Malatesta, as the political foundation of the movement. At its peak in 1903 the organisation counted with 150 affiliated unions, with around 150,000 members in eight provinces of Luzon. After the UOD staged a massive demonstration, the civil governor put them under police surveillance, branding them as “radicals, subversives and anarchists”. Since the publication of Under Three Flags in 2005 the Philippines has seen an upsurge in anarchist activities. There are groups such as the As A Whole collective, anarchists and artists who run an infoshop in Davao City, Mindanao and activities involve holding rallies against corporate exploitation and were part of a successful activist campaign that resulted in a complete ban of aerial pesticide spraying on banana plantations. The group also established a space called Saydee’s Kitchen, from which they are offering free meals twice a week, feeding up to 100 youth and elderly. But the latest anarchist project Mindsetbreaker Press and Distribution who an underground anarchist publishing and distribution entity based in the Philippines and are looking for support and solidarity in their endeavours. We’ll let the Mindsetbreaker Press comrades tell you about themselves: Mindsetbreaker Press operationally started in early 2010 as an individual project that focuses mainly on translating anarchist literature (English text) into local languages that will be more applicable and relevant to the rather complex scenario of political, social and economic currents of the Philippines. As time goes on, the press eventually grew in number after establishing personal collaboration with some friends involved in the anarchist social network and activism. The press is now run by four people specifically working on publishing and distribution campaign besides other existing projects being carried out by members. Current members of the project were involved in different projects before and presently, individually and collectively. Some run social centre or infoshops, make zine and alternative publications, organizing issue-base radical events and shows, protest and demonstrations, leafleting for campaigns, opening free shop and free food on the streets, forums, networking and hosting informational …
