---
title: "Anarchism and Sexuality"
author: "Hiram Kümper"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hiram-kumper-anarchism-and-sexuality"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest. Retrieved on 22nd November 2021 from onlinelibrary.wiley.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "hiram-kumper-anarchism-and-sexuality.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hiram-kumper-anarchism-and-sexuality.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ROOTS: SEXUALITY IN THE LABOR AND WOMEN’S MOVEMENTS        INTELLECTUALS, BOHEMIANS, AND THE RISE OF SEXOLOGY        THE “SEXUAL REVOLUTION” OF THE 1960S        NEW FEMINISM, THE GAY/LESBIAN LIBERATION MOVEMENT, AND THE “QUEER” DEBATE        REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS The ways in which questions of sexuality have been taken up by anarchist thinkers and movements are often close to those of other political tendencies, including socialism, Marxism, and even bourgeois libertinism, and many of these different discourses have inspired one another; hence, it is not always easy to differentiate between them. Theoretically, anarchists were from the beginning concerned about the private and domestic sphere in a very specific way, because in their anti-statism, they could not rely on the statist solutions of Marxists and others (crèches, public kitchens, and so on). Also, most anarchists did not believe that consciousness could be transformed by historical changes such as the mass integration of women into the industrial workforce, instead conceptualizing human nature as relatively stable. Therefore, they saw the liberation of sexuality as taking place not within the totality of society but in small local units such as families, communes, or partnerships. Some anarchists practiced alternatives to conventional sexual institutions, such as Lillian Harman’s (1869–1929) “autonomistic marriage” in 1886; however, the total refusal of institutionalized relationships seems to have been the most common answer. In contrast to the often merely rhetorical permissiveness of the 1960s student revolt and others, anarchist advocacy of “free love” often did not include the idea of polygamy or multiple changing sex partners, instead idealizing a stable, loving relationship based on companionship. Anarchists’ debates on the social meaning of sexuality are closely linked to if not even originate from two important and highly affinitive branches of social movement of the nineteenth century: the labor movement and the women’s movement. Though there certainly were liberal and even utopian thoughts on the liberation of sexuality before (amongst others, Roper 1991), it is not until the early twentieth century that the discourse intensifies from the political and intellectual margins to the center of social debate. Working-class sexuality, in explicit dichotomy to bourgeois discourses on love, marriage, and sexuality, has been of special interest to social politics from the late nineteenth century on, and later to early psychoanalysts (Freud 191617–17) as well as ethnographers (Rühle 1930). This interest is rooted in a public debate in the aftermath of Thomas Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of Population as it Affects the Future Improvement of Society (1798), which was itself a conservative rebuttal of William Godwin’s proto-anarchist tract, the Enquiry Concerning Political Justice (1793). Malthusianism, which assumed workers to be more libidinous and less morally reliable, nonetheless came to attract the interest of labor radicals, including anarchists. Poverty, the “neo-Malthusians” argued, was to a large part due to the many children sprung from workers’ uncontrolled sex life; for anarchist neo-Malthusians such as Paul Robin (1837–1912), this implied the need for workers to control their sexuality in their own interest, via birth control and contraception – concerns shared with the women’s movement – as well as the possibility of eugenics (McLaren 1976: 490–2; also Cleminson 2000a: 35ff., 159ff.). While many working-class anarchists did not question hierarchy in the family or rethink the role of marriage, anarchist feminists such as Joseph Déjacque (1821–64) did. Research on the impact of early feminism (and of feminism per se ) on anarchism is – with some few exceptions, such as the Spanish Mujeres Libres – still surprisingly sparse (Gemie 1996). Still, the “sex question” (Goldman 1896: 3) was very important to the early activists, among whom …
