---
title: "Claim of responsibility for incendiary attack against Trastor REIC"
author: "Fire to Sweatshops (FAI/FRI)"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fire-to-sweatshops-fai-fri-claim-of-responsibility-for-incendiary-attack-against-trastor-reic"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=11027&gt;. Retrieved on 03/07/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "fire-to-sweatshops-fai-fri-claim-of-responsibility-for-incendiary-attack-against-trastor-reic.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fire-to-sweatshops-fai-fri-claim-of-responsibility-for-incendiary-attack-against-trastor-reic.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We are witnessing the most extreme contradictions that are born and die in this shit-world. While the calculators of sorcerer’s apprentices of economic statistics are counting 23,000 dead in Syria, billions of people are watching besotted the London Olympic Games; the distance between the Olympic and the ‘practical’ shooting in the field of operations is just a simple push of the button on a remote control. If only it could happen… all these rivers of blood to become an impetuous torrent which will drown athletes and spectators. If only it could happen… We can refer all the same to the thousands of homeless people ‘messing up’ the image of the dire city, while the rich enjoy their luxurious comforts in the gardens of Ekali and Kifissia (two of the richest suburbs of Athens). Societies that, despite their contradictions, manage to reproduce the stench they’re emitting, partitioning everyone and everything, manufacturing hundreds of microcosms. Power is not a compact structure but a diffused edifice, located on the systemic structures—economic, institutional, etc.—and human relations. Starting from society’s chopping into antagonistic-with-each-other subsets, the constant fragmentation continues in the individual’s daily life within the capitalist world; in every aspect of the individual’s life, in every field of expression. At this point the system completes its ‘omnipotence’, at the point where it raises the walls of isolation even in the most trivial of everyday processes. At the point where the paravans of resignation and indifference fall, hence rises the sepsis of the sleaziest kind of selfishness, of the most petty ego, an exalted sense of passive midenism . For my part, my part, my part. For me, me, me. The practical recording of the above assessment can be found either in the material possession of illusions in the era of capitalist prosperity—home, car, rapid rise of ‘small property’— or in the emigration for work abroad amidst conditions of economic crisis. It’s the same ideologue of modern lifestyle with modified variables. From illusions of the ownership’s onslaught, to stampede. “When, at the end of their lives, most people look back they’ll find that they have lived their lifelong ad interim. They’ll be surprised to realize that the very thing they allowed to slip by unappreciated and unenjoyed was just their life. And so a man, having been duped by hope, dances into the arms of death.” (Arthur Schopenhauer) A result of the intensity observed in the social machine is the fascists’ growing momentum; a fact that in no way goes unnoticed. We’re talking about a general shift of society and the State towards racist/ fascist/ nationalist guidelines. This can either be about the bodies of HIV-positive women that got humiliated through the collaboration of the cops with the KEELPNO (‘Hellenic Centre for Disease Control & Prevention’) and the mass media, or about the ongoing pogroms against migrants and the dozens of murderous attacks against them. ‘Legitimate’ and ‘illegal’ operations become one, under the ironically allegorical name ‘Xenios Zeus’ . The democratic operation’s culmination was the assassination of an Iraqi migrant (on Anaxagora Street, in Omonia) by rippers identical to the goldendawners [Greek nationalist-fascist party] . So, the conclusion is that the state mechanism’s moves against migrants reflect a SOCIAL DEMAND; the racist hatred of every shit-souled macho Hellene is added to the demand for security. The knife of the insulted pseudo-egoism of the Greek-souled wanker is to be found next to the police buses and paddy wagons and the concentration camps for migrants, and the ribs of some random migrant will be stabbed at the first opportunity with that knife, applying the logic of collective responsibility. Under no circumstances do we highlight these incidents from a victimized perspective, nor will we ever proclaim ourselves self-appointed patrons of nobody; far off from a rhetoric that sanctifies all m…
