---
title: "Direct Action and Unmediated Struggle"
author: "South London Solidarity Federation, Solidarity Federation"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/south-london-solidarity-federation-direct-action-and-unmediated-struggle"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Chapter 20 of ‘What We Are Fighting For: A Radical Collective Manifesto’, Edited by Federico Campagna and Emanuele Campiglio, Pluto Press, 2012."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "south-london-solidarity-federation-direct-action-and-unmediated-struggle.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/south-london-solidarity-federation-direct-action-and-unmediated-struggle.epub"
    hosted: false
---

If we are to stand any chance of winning the world, we need direct action, self-organisation, and solidarity. Jumping through the hoops of representation and the legalism of trade unions and political parties only serves to dilute our struggles and sacrifice our control over them, rendering us passive ‘stakeholders’ or ‘shareholders’ in the process. Rather than being spectators in a mediated struggle, we must act for ourselves and represent ourselves. Our actions are informed by two closely linked aims: The desire to improve our situation in the day-to-day, through struggle and building different social bonds. The need to put an end to the underlying system of social relations, capitalism. Throughout the history of the movement to end the present state of things, there have been currents that have argued for these goals, and which have sought to make the means and ends of the struggle against capitalism and class society consistent. [1] If we want to effectively engage in class struggle, we need to recapture and revitalise this repressed and neutralised tradition. [2] When we speak of class struggle, we mean the skirmishes and battles between workers and bosses, oppressors and oppressed, rulers and ruled. The vast majority of the UK’s population (indeed, of the world’s) are workers. We recognise that there are many divisions between workers based on the amount of power, security and privilege they have, but we don’t find the concept of a stable middle class useful. Groups of workers considered middle class a generation ago now find themselves impoverished and under attack. The terms and conditions, to our mind, which marked them out have been salami-sliced away in the last 30 years. So anyone who has to work for a living, or claim benefits, or just scrape by in the margins, is working class. It is in the interests of all workers to abolish work, by which we mean wage labour. We want freedom, both to govern ourselves and to create new social relations. The ruling classes will not voluntarily give up their power, which is why this change has to be a revolutionary one. The state, which emerged with the purpose of running society in the interests of the ruling class, cannot be turned to another use, such as the administration and re-forging of a free society. [3] Rather it needs to be destroyed along with capitalism and its social and economic hierarchies and institutions. Anarcho-syndicalism represents our living knowledge of tactics and methods, which have been passed through generations of class struggle. It is the application of anarchist methods to the workers’ struggle, through unmediated free association in the places of work/oppression. Key to this is direct action, self-organisation and solidarity. We apply these approaches to everything we do, from building workplace committees, to community organising, to the internal functions of our organisations. Direct action is a notion of such clarity, of such self-evident transparency, that merely to speak the words defines and explains them. It means that the working class, in constant rebellion against the existing state of affairs, expects nothing from outside people, powers of forces, but rather creates its own conditions of struggle and looks to itself for its means of action. It means that, against the existing society which recognises only the citizen, rises the producer. And that that producer, having grasped that any social grouping models itself upon its system of production, intends to attack directly the capitalist mode of production in order to transform it, by eliminating the employer and thereby achieving sovereignty in the workshop – the essential condition for the enjoyment of real freedom. — Emile Pouget, Direct Action Most of what the media calls direct action takes the form of spectacular public relations stunts designed to gain attention for a cause that is otherwise fought by legalistic means (i.e. hard lobbying). Direct action, as we know it, is a more imme…
