---
title: "Anarchists’ Line Within The Trade Union Movement"
author: "Errico Malatesta"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/errico-malatesta-anarchists-line-within-the-trade-union-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Report to the International anarchist Congress in Paris in 1923"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "errico-malatesta-anarchists-line-within-the-trade-union-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/errico-malatesta-anarchists-line-within-the-trade-union-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Charged with reporting on the trade union question at a time of crisis, when the old tactics need re-examining in the light of recent experiences so that they can be adapted to fresh circumstances, and when the arrest, exile, and harassment of so many of the active members of the Unione makes it hard to communicate with comrades and get an exact feel for their current thoughts and dispositions, I can only speak for myself here and on my own account—though I am convinced, on the basis of what I know of the movement, that what I am about to say will articulate the thoughts of the vast majority, and possibly the totality, of the anarchists that are members of the Unione Anarchica Italiana. [1] We have always recognized the great significance of the workers’ movement and the need for anarchists to be an active driving force within it. And it has frequently been at the instigation of our comrades that the liveliest and most pugnacious labor groupings have been established. We have always been of the opinion that trade unionism is, today, a means whereby the workers begin to understand their slave status and to crave emancipation and get used to solidarity with all the oppressed in the fight against the oppressors—and that it will, tomorrow, serve as the essential core vital to continuity in the life of society and to the reorganizing of production without bosses or parasites. But we have always argued and often disagreed over the manner in which anarchist activity was to be pursued in dealings with the workers’ organization. Were we to enter the unions or else stay outside, albeit taking part in all of the agitations with an eye to making these as radical as possible and to taking the lead when there were things that needed doing and dangers to be braved? And above all, once inside the unions, were we or were we not to take up leadership posts and thereby be part of the horse-trading, compromises, accommodations, dealing with the authorities and the bosses to which unions had to submit, according to the workers’ own wishes on behalf of their short-term interests in day-to-day struggles, when revolution was not on the agenda but the securing of improvements or defence of gains already won were? In the two years following the peace, and up until the eve of the reaction’s triumph thanks to fascism, we found ourselves in a peculiar situation. Revolution looked imminent, and actually all the material and spiritual conditions were in place to make it feasible and necessary. But we anarchists fell well short of having the sort of strength needed to make the revolution using only our own methods and men; we needed the masses and, though they were ready for action, they were not anarchist. Moreover, even had one been possible, a revolution made without the participation of the masses could only have led to a brand new overlordship, which, even should it be wielded by anarchists, would always have been a negation of anarchism, would have corrupted the new overlords, and would have ended in restoration of the statist and capitalist order. To have pulled out of the struggle and abstained on the basis that we were unable to do exactly what we might have wished, would have been tantamount to giving up on any present or future opportunity, any hope of steering the movement in the direction of our preference—and abandoning it not only this time but for good, since the masses would never be anarchist prior to a political and economic overhaul of society, and the same situation would be replicated every time that circumstances made an attempt at revolution feasible. We therefore had to win the trust of the masses at any cost, equip ourselves to be able to push them on to the streets and, to that end, there seemed to be a purpose to our capturing positions of leadership within the workers’ organizations. All the dangers of domestication and corruption were pushed into the background and, besides, the assumption was that they would not have time to co…
