---
title: "Anarchism & Polyamory"
author: "Dysophia"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dysophia-anarchism-and-polyamory"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A collection of articles, past and present, on the connection between open relationships and anarchism, and looking at some of the problems that arise."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "dysophia-anarchism-and-polyamory.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dysophia-anarchism-and-polyamory.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction      Green Anarchism and Polyamory      Modern Society      Jealousy        “Ethical Meddling”      Polyamory and Polyfidelity        Fulfilment        Emotionally oriented relationships      Back to anarchism        The Red and Black Movement      Putting it into practice        Not a panacea        Agreements        Choice        Predators        Health and safety        Marriage        Secondary/Primary relationships        Ageism        Exploring different kinds of sexuality        Promiscuity      A personal perspective        Power        Hierarchy        Control        Self‐reflection & Awareness        Care and compassion      Let them eat cake: Anarchist polyamory theory and reality      Emma Goldman on Marriage and Love      A Conversation      Anarchy is love, Love is anarchy      8 Points on Relationship Anarchy        You can love a lot of people — each relationship is unique        Love and Respect is to have no demands        Give yourself a solid point of view        Remember the heterosexual norm but don’t be afraid        Spontaneity instead of duty        Fake it ‘til you make it        Trust is better than being suspicious        Change through communication      The Rise of Polyamory: Leftist men’s self‐serving cure all for sexism      A Green Anarchist Project on Freedom and Love        Rules of Engagement        Choice and Respect        Jealousy and Other Feelings        Break Out or Break Up        Direct Action        Communities Not Couples        Right Here, Right Now      Resources Anarchism is more than dry political theory. It is a set of principles by which we aspire to live. It is not just about challenging the status quo, but provides tenets through which we can solve problems and (re‐)define our relationships with the world around us. We shall not go into what we mean by anarchism in depth as that was covered in the first issue of dysophia . However, the basic concepts of anarchism used here are: That all shall be free and equal. That we extend mutual aid and solidarity (how far this should be extended is an open question…) In this issue we look at polyfidelity and polyamory; that is, having multiple partners and lovers – something that bubbles constantly under the surface of mainstream society and within anarchist movements. Often where it does burst out into the open it is seen through the lens of traditional moral criticisms based on notions of patriarchy, ownership and attitudes to sex based more on religious morality and economic dominance than anything else. Just as anarchism puts the power relations of economics under the microscope we should do the same for the relationships we have with our partners and lovers – often they are reflections of a society dominated by patriarchy and economic power which creates social norms that meets it own needs, not our own as individuals. Polyamory should not wait for the anarchist utopia – it is something we can practice here and now. Too often people are dismissed or criticised for being open with their love and sex without considering whether it is society and traditional attitudes which are at fault. At the other end of the spectrum, ‘free love’ is used and abused in the name of anarchism. Thus, this pamphlet makes the links between anarchism and open relationships while also discussing how much of what currently passes as polyamory among anarchists fails to address the problems of being polyamorous within modern society, something that is often overlooked in existing literature. Whether you are new to this subject, or already involved in open relationships there should be something for you in the following pages. If the writings here encourage you to explore the practicalities of open relationships, we hope you take away some of the lessons learned, but we strongly suggest you read some of the other resources as well, including the practical guide “With Open Hands” (see Resources at end). If you want to contribute an article to…
