---
title: "Anarchism and the Arab Uprising"
author: "Mohammed A. Bamyeh, Joshua Stephens"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/joshua-stephens-anarchism-and-the-arab-uprising"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Interview with Mohammed Bamyeh"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "joshua-stephens-anarchism-and-the-arab-uprising.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/joshua-stephens-anarchism-and-the-arab-uprising.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Spontaneity, largely horizontal organization, and a suspicion toward explicit political leadership have all been signature components of what’s referred to as the Arab Spring. This has been the case since the outbreak of the Tunisian revolution—regardless of the regimes that have resulted from the power vacuums left in their wake. Yet very little of the particularities or the historical forces driving these uprisings captured the imagination of or spoke to left anti-authoritarians in the west, until the appearance of a western-style black bloc in Cairo on the two-year anniversary of the Egyptian revolution. That contradiction, and a sudden gaze cast—particularly on Egypt—pose rather unsettling questions about representation, and a slouch toward Orientalism. The romantic accounts of Arab struggle constructed in the US (most recently, in an “open letter” to the Black Bloc, from Crimethinc), commit a signature sin of omission. Namely, the Arabs present in these accounts (published largely for an English-speaking audience) don’t speak, and are not heard. The features we’re treated to are filtered through a process of selection in which Arabs did not participate. Consequently, what these accounts convey—well-meaning, or no—has more to do with what their authors see of themselves in their subject matter, and less to do with anything happening on the ground in Arab struggles. Mohammed Bamyeh is a sociologist of social movements at the University of Pittsburgh, who has written critically about the intersection of anarchism and the dynamics of the Arab uprisings. I encountered him through an article published on the website Jadaliyya several years ago, and sought him out on the topic of anarchism in the Arab world. This conversation resulted. Joshua Stephens: We’ve talked a little about treating anarchism as a methodology, or something reflected in practices, as opposed to something that stands in for party affiliation. What informs that, for you? Mohammed Bamyeh: It is informed by my understanding of anarchism as something that already exists rather than as some future utopia; that is, as part of some (though obviously not all) familiar social traditions of self-management, mutual aid, solidarity, and local trust. This means that when we talk about anarchism as a “method,” we are talking about the aspects of anarchism that are already embedded in some reality in an organic way, even though there may be no explicit anarchist theory around. JS: Where do you see that intersecting with the Arab uprisings of the last two years? MB: The uprisings succeeded best where there was no clear leadership and no strong organizations. Wherever you had the latter, you had reform processes at best or incomplete revolutions (Yemen, Bahrain, Jordan, and Morocco, for example). Note also how in Syria, for example, one speaks of “coordination” or “coordinating committees,” not leadership structures or executive councils. The entire Syrian uprising has been anarchic, and more features of that reality are becoming obvious now, as people have developed self-governing local structures wherever the regime has left the ground. Anarchism as a mode of life and organization is in this case a necessity, not a theoretical luxury. Of course, we will not see much of this reality if we focus our attention only on the “high politics” of transitional or a post-revolutionary phase. Such politics correspond to the making of a liberal order. I don’t think that this is avoidable at this point, especially given that the vast majority of the people support a liberal order of some sort (including the religious parties). But anarchism lives on not at that level, but in the ongoing and long-term cultural transformations. JS: What appears to distinguish this era of uprisings—and this is true globally, really, but is particularly striking with regard to places that have emerged from colonialism in the last century—is the spontaneity and lack of centralized leadership within the rebel…
