---
title: "Anarchy"
author: "Manuel González Prada"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/manuel-gonzalez-prada-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Anarchy, by Manuel Gonzales Prada, was translated by F. Woodworth and appeared in the November 1972 issue of The Match!, a monthly journal of Anarchist opinion available from P.O. Box 3488 in Tucson, Arizona, 85722. This article is available direct from David Brown, 9504–15th N.W., Seattle, Washingt"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "manuel-gonzalez-prada-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/manuel-gonzalez-prada-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What Is Anarchy ?        Church and State If we were to ask some person for a serious reply to the question, ‘What is Anarchy?’ he would recite to us this catechism: “Anarchy is social dislocation, the state of permanent warfare, the regression of mankind to a state of primitive baroarism.’’ He would also call the Anarchist a swornenemy ofother people’s lives and property... A widespread notion is that the Anarchist ideal could be » summed up as doing evil for the pleasure of it. But to maintain in political or religious discussions that our opponent is an imbecile or a villain, is only to say that our opponent does not think as we do. Anarchy and Anarchist really mean the exact opposite of what their detractors pretend, and we could accurately define the Anarchists’ ideal as — unlimited freedom and the highest possible wellbeing of the individual with the abolition of the State. The Anarchist rejects all authoritv or domination, no matter what the torm, including that most absurd kind of all, domination by the people. The Anarchist rejects laws, religions, nationalities; and recognizes one power only: that of the individual. Authority leads to abuse, obedience implies subjugation, for the truly emancipated human being does not strive to dominate anyone else, and accepts no other authority than that of oneself over oneself. It is not the worker alone who Suffers the iniquity of the laws; we are all, to a greater or lesser degree mocked and exploited — we all find ourselves caught by the immense octopus of the State. Excluding that swarm of parasites who are immersed in opulence and savor today with no concern for tomorrow, the great mass of people fights almost without hope to cover their own nakedness and to conquer hunger. Being a mixture of humanity in its infancy as well asits old age, this mass creeps like a child and wanders like an old person, always a slave to the two great oppressors: religion and government. Now, Anarchists would certainly not mind if the members of various religions contented themselves with believing in their dogmas, practicing their worship, or preaching their doctrines, But many sects (notably the Catholic) depart from this ideal. They insist upon creating an alloy of politics and religion, and they struggle to instal themselves as the exclusive fount of power. The Roman Catholic priest is in fact the incarnation of this principle of authority; he allies himself forever with the moneyed interests and the military in the hope of eventually supplanting these, or taking control. Not satisfied with ruling, he dreams of empire. Thus, in many countries, the Anarchist is forced to become an irreligious polemicist and an aggressive anticleric. Read “defensive” here, though, because the real aggression springs originally from the clergy. While the philosopher and the revolutionist sleep, the priest is awake. Thinking himself the doer of some divine work, and imagining that he has a monopoly on truth, he would suppress industry, art, science, in order to impose on the world the tyranny of his dogmatic superstitions. The priest’s mind has no other illumination besides the dark fire of fanaticism. Politics is a solidly organized religion, having as its fetish the State, as its dogmas the constitutions, as its liturgy the rules and statutes, as its priesthood the office-holders, as its faithful the mob of citizenry. Spencer noted that yesterday’s great political superstition, that of the divine right of kings, has yielded to the widespread superstition of our own times: the divine right of legislatures. Given the normal inclination of people toward abusing power, every government is bad and all authority signifies tyranny, just as each law translates itself into a sanction for continued abuses. Combatting forms of government, authorities and laws, emerging to dissolve political force, the libertarian paves the road for eventual revolution. When one says Anarchy, one says revolution, And no doubt about …
