---
title: "Anarchism In Four Parts"
author: "Libertarian Socialist Rants"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/libertarian-socialist-rants-anarchism-in-four-parts-video-transcript"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "(Video Series Transcript)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "libertarian-socialist-rants-anarchism-in-four-parts-video-transcript.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/libertarian-socialist-rants-anarchism-in-four-parts-video-transcript.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Case Against Hierarchy          Capitalism          The State          White Supremacy, Cisheteropatriarchy, and Ableism          Concluding Thoughts        The Case For Liberty          Socialism          Statelessness          Intersectional feminism, disability accommodation, liberation of oppressed racial groups          Concluding Thoughts        The Case for Revolution          Prefiguration and Anarchist Organisations          Direct Action and the Culture of Resistance          Social Revolution          Internationalism          Concluding Thoughts        Arguments Against Anarchism This is the transcript of a four-part video series by the YouTube user Libertarian Socialist Rants, which gives an introduction to the basic tenets of anarchism. These videos are updated versions of an old series which he did in 2013. The human race is now in a position in which we are going to have to ask ourselves a very serious question — are we going to continue existing as a civilisation? Human and non-human life is under threat from ecological catastrophe as we sail past the tipping poits of anthropogenic global warming. The threat of nuclear warfare is an equally grim prospect brought on by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. These imminent threats are not due to forces beyond our control, but are a direct consequence of how our human activities are currently organised. We are standing on a cliff edge, and not because the population of the world somehow wills its own destruction, but because we live in a society of highly concentrated wealth and power, in which elite interests exercise dominion over others. In many areas of life, there exist social hierarchies in which people are ranked one above another in terms of status and authority. Because these hierarchies limit the scope of human freedom, they should be challenged to prove that they are legitimate, and if they fail to prove their legitimacy, they should be dismantled from below and replaced with horizontal organisation. This video is a critique of these hierarchical systems. What are the defining characteristics of capitalism? The means of production – factories, farms, offices etc – are owned privately by individuals. Goods and services are exchanged for profit in a market economy. Another defining feature is wage labour. A capitalist society, by its very nature, is divided into those who own the means of production – the capitalist class – and those who don’t – the working class. If you’re working class, you have to sell your ability to work to a capitalist in exchange for a wage, which you use to buy the stuff you need to live – that’s what wage labour is. Capitalists need to stay afloat in the marketplace and compete with other capitalists, so they need to keep their prices low – they can’t just arbitrarily raise the prices of their products above production costs. How, then, does the capitalist make profit and end up with more value than they started with? Well, the way they do that is by paying workers just enough so that they are able to buy the things they need to survive and go to work each day, but by getting them to produce more value than what they are being paid for. The extra value that workers produce is called surplus value, and capitalists make profit by taking that surplus value for themselves. To protect this system of private ownership, the power to make decisions about the productive process – what to produce, how to produce it, and what to do with the products – must remain in the hands of private owners. Rather than having control over these decisions, working class people are made to submit to the authority of bosses. At its core, capitalism is a system in which those who own the means of production exploit and exercise authority over those who don’t. The consequences of this system are as follows. For the vast majority of the population, the working class, we don’t have control over our work, but instead have to spend our tim…
