---
title: "Bakunin and the Entheogenic Challenge to Atheism"
author: "Sebastian Job"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sebastian-job-bakunin-and-the-entheogenic-challenge-to-atheism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Anarchist Studies vol. 24, no. 2. Retrieved on 9th September 2025 from journals.lwbooks.co.uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sebastian-job-bakunin-and-the-entheogenic-challenge-to-atheism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sebastian-job-bakunin-and-the-entheogenic-challenge-to-atheism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ABSTRACT        ‘TE AMO! TE AMO! TE AMO!..’.        INSIDE NATURE        UN/BELIEF IN GOD        CONCLUSION As fossil fuelled capitalism drags global civilisation towards the strange attractor of ecological implosion, can we get any help from outside (what the secular mainstream in the west generally recognises as), the human social field? This paper makes the case for the pedagogical potential of the naturally-occurring psychoactive ‘entheogens’, that is, substances which, taken sacramentally, are held to ‘engender the divine within’. Handled in a thoughtful way, these substances, I argue, are potential allies for the remaking of the revolutionary movement in an age where human extinction is now thinkable. Between the existing radical left in its various forms, and this ally, however, there are some obstacles. One such obstacle is the atheism of the dominant European revolutionary tradition. In this paper Mikhail Bakunin’s influential critique of religion as a form of human domination, as an enemy of human freedom, is taken as exemplary of this tradition. The testimony, meanwhile, of entheogenic experience puts this familiar leftist-atheist standpoint in question. Drawing on fieldwork and interviews with users of entheogens including ayahuasca, vaporised DMT, and 5-MeO-DMT toad venom, I argue that a left willing to open itself to these experiences could gain a new standpoint from which to oppose and outflank capitalist ecocide. [1] Keywords: Bakunin, God, Hegel, ayahuasca, entheogens, 5-MeO-DMT, ecology, atheism, left. ‘There are no atheists after 0.4mgs of DMT’. [2] Anon. There exists a class of molecules that stands apart from all others. This is the class with the property of radically but temporarily altering human consciousness. New types are invented weekly; many are naturally occurring. Avoiding the pejorative and question-begging flavour of ‘hallucinogens’, we can speak generically of ‘psychoactives’. In the mestizo shamanic tradition in the Iquitos region of Amazonian Peru, where I have worked, many of the naturally occurring psychoactives in traditional use are called ‘teacher plants’ (plantas maestras), and the pedagogical emphasis here is well merited. [3] However, these substances are also found outside the plant kingdom. As a rule of thumb we can say that the terms ‘psychedelics’ (LSD, mescaline, DMT, psilocybin), ‘dissociatives’ (ketamine, salvia divinorum), and ‘empathogens’ (MDMA, MDA), refer to different types within the broad class of psychoactive substances when there is no explicit emphasis on sacramental usage. ‘Entheogen’, a neologism which means literally to generate or engender the divine within, refers to any of these substances, natural or synthetic, and indeed others, such as cannabis, coca leaves, and even tobacco, but only when they are employed in the service of healing, enlightenment, initiation, social bonding, and similar intentional uses. The term ‘entheogen’ was invented, in 1973, to recall psychedelic enthusiasts to ancient traditions of ritualised use of psychoactives. The term consequently refers to pre-modern as well as contemporary practices. [4] While in common parlance ‘psychedelic’ might be said to reference the vast and wild terrain of the untutored ‘trip,’ the ‘entheogenic journey’ is explicitly oriented to the revelatory and reverential aspects of the experience, and often involves ritual, meditation and incantatory practices aimed at getting on good terms with the substance. It is broadly these kinds of intentional uses of psychoactives that seem to me most promising and that I want to consider here. In recent decades entheogenic practices have begun to percolate back into, and be reinvented, in modern societies. Hundreds of thousands of people are undergoing the uncanny initiation into the tryptamine zone that is afforded by ayahuasca, vaporised or smoked DMT, 5-MeO-DMT and other substances. They are doing so, for the most part, without churches, without political sancti…
