---
title: "Automation and the Need for a Social Vision"
author: "Jack Gerson"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-gerson-automation-and-the-need-for-a-social-vision"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The Utopian 16.7. Retrieved on 11th August 2021 from utopianmag.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jack-gerson-automation-and-the-need-for-a-social-vision.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-gerson-automation-and-the-need-for-a-social-vision.epub"
    hosted: false
---

On July 15, I attended a forum on the effect of automation on longshore workers, in the U.S. and around the world, held in San Francisco at the meeting hall of International Longshore and Warehouse Workers Union Local 10 (ILWU 10). Much of the discussion centered on the news that a major Chinese port – Qingdao New Qianwan Container Terminal (QQCTN) has introduced Asia’s first fully automated port terminal, including two berths with a capacity of 1.5 million TEUs (each TEU is a 20-foot long container unit), with seven huge ship-to-shore gantry cranes serving two berths operated by remote control, 38 automated stacking cranes, and 38 battery-powered automated guiding vehicles (the automated guided vehicles are programmed with routes and tasks, and with artificial intelligence algorithms that recognize when the vehicles need to be recharged and drive to a battery swap station where a robot equips them with a new battery.) The terminal is controlled by laser scanners and positioning systems that can locate the four corners of each container accurately enough to clamp and move them into driverless trucks. The technology enables the terminal to operate around the clock, including in complete darkness, reducing labor costs by 70%: the number of workers required to unload a cargo ship has been reduced from 60 to 9. And this is just phase one of QQCTN’s automation. When the next phases are complete, a total of six berths will be completely automated – QQCTN will operate around the clock, its berths fully automated, its labor force almost completely eliminated (aside from crew in the central control room, who clearly are highly vulnerable to further automation.) While a significant number of longshore jobs have been lost to attrition since the ILWU (and the east coast dockworkers union, the ILA) agreed to accept containerization more than 40 years ago, and although some major terminals in Europe and Latin America had been largely automated, the news of the automation of QQCTN nevertheless sent shock waves through the room. QQCTN was automated in three years – heretofore, it had taken at least ten years to fully automate a terminal. The handwriting was already on the wall – the RWG terminal in the port of Rotterdam has been nearly fully automated since 2015 (only one human worker is involved in running the ship to shore gantries at the RWG terminal in Rotterdam), and other ports in northern Europe (especially Hamburg), in Turkey, in Venezuela, and elsewhere have introduced substantial automation — but the aggressive speed at which the automation project at QQCTN was completed (and a similar project at Shanghai is well on its way to completion at comparable speed) convinced the ILWU members that Oakland and other major U.S. ports may soon follow in the footsteps of QQCTN. Partial moves in this direction are already in place. For example, in 2008 the ILWU locals at the giant ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach formally agreed to the use of self-driving and automated technologies. On the east coast, ILA president Jim McNamara told Fox News, “We have no problem with semi-automated terminals. New technology is fine if it keeps our workers safe, but full automation means that our jobs are gone.” McNamara conveniently overlooked the loss of jobs and of control over working conditions working to “semi-automation” – starting with containerization, and continuing through to the acceptance of self-driving vehicles on the docks. But now, another leap is occurring, as ports around the world are poised to rapidly install fully automated terminals. And as they do, the jobs still remaining on the longshore – stevedores, warehouse workers, clericals – will be squeezed out. No jobs, no work. Even the ILWU leaders can grasp this – no jobs, no work; no work, no dues; no dues, no union staff. And not just the longshore, but all of shipping, is going this way. Engineering firms are designing unmanned, remote-controlled ships – for example, Rolls Royce is deve…
