---
title: "Bust the Myths About Collective Agreements"
author: "Emil Broberg, Rasmus Hästbacka"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rasmus-hastbacka-emil-broberg-bust-the-myths-about-collective-agreements"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Notes From the Swedish Labor Market"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rasmus-hastbacka-emil-broberg-bust-the-myths-about-collective-agreements.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rasmus-hastbacka-emil-broberg-bust-the-myths-about-collective-agreements.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In Sweden, as in many other countries, employers are attacking the collective agreements (or the labor contracts , as it’s called in North America). “If workers are to defend collective agreements and push the frontline forward, the myths about collective agreements must be dispelled.” Thus write Rasmus Hästbacka and Emil Broberg. Below they highlight three myths that are produced by Swedish unions, not by employers, to the detriment of workers. At least since the early 1900s, Swedish employers have been very class conscious and well organized. The Swedish Employers’ Association (SAF) was founded in 1902. SAF was replaced in 2001 by the association Svenskt Näringsliv (Confederation of Swedish Enterprise). Curt Nicolin was the chairman of SAF in the 1970s. Nicolin’s battle cry of 1976 has become legendary: “We must short-circuit the trade union system.” Employers were desperate and it is easy to understand why. Right up to the year 1980, the wages’ share of the produced value in companies increased, at the expense of the profits’ share. At that time, demands for democratization of workplaces were also very popular. During Curt Nicolin’s time, an offensive was launched against working people that we are still living under in Sweden. This offensive is well described in the Swedish TV documentary “The wage dumpers” (Lönesänkarna) and by researchers writing the anthology “The decreased wage share” (Den sänkta lönandelen, 2013). The employers’ offensive has indeed borne fruit. On June 12, 1999, the well-known capitalist Robert Weil made the following statement in Sweden’s biggest newspaper Dagens Nyheter: "Capitalists, unite and thank the wage earners! Thanks to the many who gave up almost everything so that we capitalists could get too much! But now the party of capital is most likely over soon and we will probably never experience anything like it again." Nine years later, in Dagens Nyheter on February 20, 2008, Robert Weil stated that the party had not ended. Capitalists were even better off. FIVE STRATEGIES A given target for offensive employers is collective agreements. In the Swedish labor market today, collective agreements are attacked by means of at least five different strategies. Employers… (1) …refuse to sign collective agreements (2) …sign agreements but refuse to follow them (3) …hire other companies with cheap labor (4) …conduct so called “collective agreement shopping”, i.e. apply cheap collective agreements instead of expensive agreements (5) …advocate and actually abide by collective agreements, but then conduct militant struggle to change the content of agreements to the detriment of workers. The first and second strategy (refusing to sign collective agreements or refusing to follow them) are used by various criminal employers who are outside the employers’ associations. It is a sign of our times that Swedish state authorities are developing a collaboration against “working life criminality” (in Swedish: arbetslivskriminalitet). It is also telling that a current research project at Stockholm University raises the question: Why doesn’t Swedish labor law work? The strategy to sign collective agreements but refuse to abide by them is not only used by obvious crooks. The strategy is also used by many companies within reputable employers’ associations, such as ALMEGA in the service sector. The third strategy (hiring other companies with cheap labor) is often used by municipal and state employers. Labor is cheap because these companies don’t have or don’t follow collective agreements – or the companies apply agreements that are so lousy that labor is cheap. The fourth strategy (collective agreement shopping) is promoted by new legislation, namely the Swedish anti-strike act of 2019 . This act was supported by leaders of the big social democratic union LO as well as by leaders of the white-collar unions TCO and Saco. Union grassroots and critical lawyers warned that the anti-strike act would protect employers who conduct…
