---
title: "Anti-war resistance in Russia"
author: "Tom Hughes"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-hughes-anti-war-resistance-in-russia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Relevant as to the publishing date of May 24th, 2022 Retrieved on May 27th, 2022 from https://www.anarchistcommunism.org/2022/05/24/anti-war-resistance-in-russia/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tom-hughes-anti-war-resistance-in-russia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-hughes-anti-war-resistance-in-russia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The Ukrainian tennis player Sergiy Stakhovsky recently commented on the so called ‘lack of resistance’ to war within Russia, saying: “”In the first few weeks I honestly believed that the Russians, once they saw what the army was doing, when they’re watching the destruction of cities, the bombing of cities such as Kharkiv and Kyiv that they would go out and protest. But that didn’t happen. Nobody came out. Few came to protest. There were no masses.” Stakhovsky seems to being drawn into the dangerous nationalist tide that is gaining hold in both Ukraine and Russia. In the world of sport itself, the Russian tennis player Andrei Rublev wrote ‘no war please’ on a TV camera lens after winning a match in Dubai, whilst the world number two tennis player Daniil Medvedev spoke about “promoting peace”. When war did break out, there were mass demonstrations, and individual protests involving putting messages in windows and on balconies, and affixing on cards and clothes, either peace signs or other anti-war symbols, or symbols of Ukraine. There were pickets by individuals, and a large number of anti-war petitions. Many professions garnered tens of thousands of signatures from their own field on petitions calling for the end of the war. Between 24th and 28th of February, more than 6,440 people were arrested at anti-war actions. Some were simply passers-by who witnessed the police arrests. In the first month of the anti-war protests, a total of 15,000 people were arrested and tried in hearings that lasted from 3 to 10 minutes. These trials are still going on. They have resulted in short prison sentences, fines and felony cases. In addition to the arrests, the Russian state passed a new law on March 5th which could mean up to 15 years jail and at the very least heavy fines, for spreading “fake news” about the military. In addition much of the oppositional media-newspapers, radio stations, websites- have been closed down. Stricter censorship was imposed on the regional media, so that coverage of the war has ceased, or the propaganda of the Putin regime is transmitted. Many journalists, unable to report on the war, have fled abroad. In schools, teachers are being forced to carry out pro-war propaganda lessons. Those who refused have been sacked or pressurised to resign. Again, some had to flee abroad because of the threat of prosecution. A teacher in Penza is facing felony charges for anti-war comments in a class. In mid-March, two paramedics were arrested for putting up anti-war graffiti and are now under house arrest. In Kasimov in the Ryazan region, a Moscow journalist and a local inhabitant have been accused of vandalism for spray painting “Putin get out” on a statue of Lenin. They were tortured in order to make them confess. This repression brought the open anti-war demonstrations to a finish by the end of March. As a result individual protests are taking their place. These include slogans written on walls and fences, and writing anti-war slogans like Het bonhe ( No War) on bank notes. Price tags on goods have been removed and replaced with the number of dead in Ukraine. The protests have spread throughout the Russian Federation. In Tula, 120 miles south of Moscow, a 19 year old youth, handed out anti-war leaflets at Lenin Square. On April 2nd he was arrested and fined 48,000 roubles.( around £660). A local Tula paper, Myslo, also reported that on April 10th, a car in a shopping centre park in Tula had been smeared with ketchup because it carried “Z” an “V” symbols in its windows ( these symbols are signs of support for the war and the Putin regime).A reader had contacted the paper and sent in photos of the car saying “I think such events should be made public”! In the far away Republic of Buryatia, 5,000 miles away from Moscow, and part of the Russian Federation, a 46 year old man damaged a Russian flag inscribed with Z in front of the large bronze head of Lenin in the capital Ulan-Ude. He was arrested the following day. A woman in Ulan-…
