---
title: "Davyd Chychkan"
author: "Hanna Tsiba, Solidarity Collectives"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/solidarity-collectives-davyd-chychkan"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 15th April 2026 from www.solidaritycollectives.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "solidarity-collectives-davyd-chychkan.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/solidarity-collectives-davyd-chychkan.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Today, Davyd Chychkan would have turned 40, but on 10 August 2025, he was killed in action. “ It is difficult to briefly describe Davyd, for he was a man of immense stature. Davyd was a man of outstanding intellect. He was not just an artist — he was an intellectual and a visionary. His artistic practice was inseparable from his social activism and was aimed at transforming society, raising political awareness and enhancing public discourse ” says Hanna Tsyba, Davyd’s wife. Davyd was an outstanding artist, social activist, friend and comrade, one of the most prominent figures in the Ukrainian anarchist movement. His loss was a painful blow to the anti-authoritarian and artistic communities, to his family and loved ones. It is important for us to preserve his legacy — both cultural and political. To preserve it as carefully and honestly as he himself worked with the memory of the anti-authoritarians who fought, his fallen comrades, and the movement of which he was a part. To mark this occasion, we are publishing an extensive interview with Hanna Tsyba — a conversation about who Davyd was, his role in the movement and culture, and how to preserve the memory of him and the other fallen comrades. The interview was created as part of the Decolonising Cultures of Remembrance project. The material was produced in partnership with Educat Collective. Please introduce yourself. My name is Hanna Tsiba, and I am the widow of Davyd Chychkan. He was an artist, an anarchist, and a volunteer soldier in the Armed Forces of Ukraine, serving in a mortar unit. He was killed in August 2025 while fighting in the Zaporizhzhia sector. I am also the mother of our son. My professional work is connected to journalism, contemporary art, and visual culture. In February 2022, I was invited to join the team at the BBC’s international office. I still remember how they called me an hour before the opening of Davyd’s exhibition ‘Ribbons and Triangles’ at the Lviv Municipal Art Centre. My life has changed considerably since then, but I am still working as a BBC News journalist in Kyiv. How would you briefly describe Davyd? It is difficult to describe Davyd concisely, as he was an immensely important figure. Davyd was a man of outstanding intellect. He was not merely an artist — he was an intellectual and a visionary. His artistic practice was inseparable from his social activism, which aimed to transform society, raise political literacy and engage in public discourse. At the same time, Davyd was modest and decent — people like that are rare. Out of respect for the hard work of others, he worked in one of the most challenging artistic techniques: graphic art. He devoted a great deal of time and effort to each of his pieces. As a well-known artist, he could have avoided military service or chosen a non-combat role, as public figures often do. At the start of the invasion, Davyd, an internationally renowned artist, received numerous invitations from institutions abroad. With the help of the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture, he could easily have left the country to live and hold exhibitions in Europe, as many people in the contemporary art scene did. However, he declined this privilege in solidarity with those who did not have it and volunteered to fight on the front line with a mortar unit, alongside other anarchist fighters. It is worth emphasising that, so far, Davyd is the only well-known artist to have fought on the front line. It seems to me that, usually, public figures are not drafted. Based on the logic of job reservations, they are evidently considered more valuable to society. However, Davyd did not accept this logic. He considered the very principle whereby one person’s life is deemed more valuable than another’s to be unjust and wrong. It was unacceptable to him that class affiliation or symbolic capital could determine the value of human life. As a man of left-wing views and simply as a decent human being, he refused to make use of his symbolic capital.…
