---
title: "A Battle for Life"
author: "Ba Jin"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ba-jin-a-battle-for-life"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 24 November 2010 from dwardmac.pitzer.edu"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ba-jin-a-battle-for-life.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ba-jin-a-battle-for-life.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Foreward        1. “The Masses Are the Hero of the Drama”        2. A Critically Burned Steel Worker        3. “The Furnace Cannot Go On Without Me”        4. “Many People Were Concerned and Helped Him”        5. Thousands of Hearts        6. “The Party Is My First Life”        7. Stubbornly He Lives On On May 26, 1958 at midnight, Chiu Tsai-kang, a steel worker of the Shanghai No. 3 Steel Works, was burned by molten steel. The affected area extended over 89 per cent of his body, 20 per cent being third degree burns with the muscles and bones involved. According to Western medical authorities, a patient with such severe burns would be likely to die. But due to the affectionate’ concern of the Communist Party, to the great efforts made by the medical staff and to the widespread support of society at large, Chiu Tsai-kang is still alive. After being treated for more than five months his wounds are now completely healed and covered by grafted skin. On November 23 he was transferred to the Sino-Soviet Friendship Hospital in Peking for further treatment. Three months later the function of his joints was restored and he could walk without the aid of crutches. During his stay in Peking, Chiu Tsai-kang was able to attend’ and speak at the National Conference of Active Young Builders of Socialism. On March 19, 1959 he returned to Shanghai to convalesce. During the course of treatment which saved this steel worker’s life, the Kwangtze Hospital received enthusiastic support and commendation from people in all walks of life. A very deep impression was made on some foreign friends who visited the hospital, by this marvel of healing. Dr. J. S. Horn, Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, after checking the record of the treatment, said: “I consider the treatment to be outstandingly good. I have never seen a burned patient who received such excellent treatment and minute care.” Professor De Rudler, Director of the Surgical Department of Geneva University in Switzerland, after personally examining the patient, said: “The treatment given is excellent. You observe the change of symptoms more thoroughly and carefully than we do.” Later in talking with Professor Fu Pei-pin he again remarked: “In your country where flies and mosquitoes can be exterminated, anything can be done.” A French correspondent Monsieur Robert Clarke said: “The fact that Chiu Tsai-kang whose burns extended over more than 80 per cent of his body was saved is regarded internationally as a rare occurrence.” Again he reported: “In France, a certain locomotive engineer who was no more than 50 per cent burned died, notwithstanding the fact that fifteen workers volunteered to offer their blood and skin for transfusion and grafting.” The saving of Chiu Tsai-kang’s life proves a truth, namely, that only under the leadership of the Communist Party, can the life of such a severely burned patient like Chiu Tsai-kang be snatched from the jaws of Death. It proves that only by observing the principle of thorough co-operation between the whole medical staff, and carrying out the mass line in place of allowing individuals to work alone, can the established “medical authority” of capitalist countries and the international medical records be shaken, thus effecting cures which our predecessors considered impossible. Such marvels should no longer be regarded as “accidental” in China today. Following Chiu Tsai-kang’s case the Kwangtze Hospital later saved sixteen patients with severe burns, sent there from other places. Among them was an army officer by the name of Teng Ming-chi whose burns covered 94 per cent of his body, 10 per cent being third degree burns, who did not arrive in the hospital until seven hours after the accident occurred. Owing to the fact that a summary of their experiences under the leadership of the Party had already been made by the medical workers who had saved Chiu Tsai-kang, Teng Ming-chi recovered steadily and satisfactorily after he once entered th…
