---
title: "From Rojava to the Mapuche Struggle"
author: "Pilar Villanueva"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pilar-villanueva-from-rojava-to-the-mapuche-struggle"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Kurdish Revolutionary Seed Spreads in Latin America"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "pilar-villanueva-from-rojava-to-the-mapuche-struggle.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pilar-villanueva-from-rojava-to-the-mapuche-struggle.epub"
    hosted: false
---

For several years, the Kurds have been at the forefront of a revolution in Western Kurdistan (Rojava). Their alternative system to capitalism has resonated all over the globe. Their society is organized according to Democratic Confederalism, an ethical form of political organization that brings together ideas from libertarian municipalism, social ecology, and feminism. In Latin America, one of the places where Rojava thought has taken root is Wallmapu, the ancestral territory of the Mapuche people, the largest indigenous group in Chile and Argentina. The Mapuche have struggled for centuries against repression, displacement, and dispossession of their territory and lands. Originally, some Chileans along with others from the Mapuche diaspora, inspired by the Kurdish struggle – and especially the Kurdish women’s freedom movement – came together to form a solidarity committee called the Comite de Solidaridad con Kurdistán, Región Chilena y Wallmapu (Committee of Solidarity with Kurdistan, Chilean and Wallmapu Region). This committee is a communicational platform that disseminates information about the Kurdish struggle and works to bring their model of organization to the Chilean and Mapuche territory. Meanwhile, in Argentina, a country which also denies the Mapuche people their right to self-determination, leftists and feminists have travelled to Kurdistan, and written books about their experiences with the alternative political system being built in the region. Rojava is the Kurdish area located in Northern Syria where people are developing what may be one of the most important revolutions in history. In the middle of a military repression maintained by the Turkish and Syrian government and the Islamic State, Kurdish women and men are fighting together for their freedom and that of their people. The indigenous people from the mountains in the northern Middle East – the Kurds – are currently participating in an armed struggle to protect part of their remaining territory, which includes three regions: Kobane, Jazira and Afrin. This last region was recently occupied by the military forces of the Turkish state {1} and the Kurds are trying to recover it. In the midst of this resistance, the Kurds are creating a new political, social, and economic system called Democratic Confederalism, which is based on the freedom of women and the construction of a direct democracy. This is a project for the radical democratization of society, and proposes, as their leader Abdullah Ocalan puts it in his book Democratic Confederalism , “political self-administration, in which all groups of the society and all cultural identities express themselves in local meetings, general conventions, and councils. Such a democracy opens political space for all social strata and allows diverse political groups to express themselves.” Just as Kurdistan has been denied its existence and has been forced into the territorial boundaries of Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria – so too is the ancestral territory of the Mapuche people colonized by the states of Chile and Argentina. Today, only 5% of this territory is officially recognized as Mapuche territory in Chile. Most of Wallmapu is under the control of wealthy families, the state or corporations that extract the region’s natural resources. This contemporary disregard for the right to Mapuche self-determination is nothing new. Since the Spanish colonization, the Mapuche people have experienced forced migration and territorial dislocation through countless oppressive and unjust acts perpetuated by the Chilean state. Much like the Kurds of Turkey, the Mapuche have witnessed the dispossession of their land under the violence of the national police and military. Like Kurdish children, Mapuche children have been shot and killed by police. The Mapuche people also likely felt common cause when in 2015, Sur, Cizre and other Kurdish regions in Turkey’s southeast were under military curfew. Araucanía, the region with the largest numbe…
