---
title: "Anarchism and the unions"
author: "Scott Nappalos"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/scott-nappolas-anarchism-and-the-unions"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "a critique of Malatesta’s ahistorical perspective"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "scott-nappolas-anarchism-and-the-unions.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/scott-nappolas-anarchism-and-the-unions.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1. Ideology is less a product of will than of history.        2. Malatesta misses the role of struggle radicalizing workers consciousness.        3. Not all unions were created equal. There is an old argument amongst anarchists. The argument starts with the nature of unions, and ends with the conclusion that revolutionaries shouldn’t attempt to build libertarian alternatives outside the unions, and instead should enter into the established unions and agitate for anarchism there. Though the argument doesn’t derive from Malatesta, he wrote it most succintly and is an inspiration for many. Looking at the argument we can see the missing pieces, and why this orientation towards unions is mistaken. Malatesta’s argument goes as follows. A union is set up to improve working conditions. In order for it to make good on their demands, the unions have to bring together large enough groups. If workers must be anarchists before they join then, it would be unnecessary since the workers are already revolutionary, and could just launch a revolution. The union would just be a duplicate of a political organization. The members would merely be anarchists on paper. Assume that the union has a revolutionary program. In times when it is inactive, it is possible for active revolutionaries to maintain the program. In times when the union is active and attracts large numbers, there will be a number of conflicting ideas. Short term interests will be more expedient and win more gains, and thereby win out over the program. The conclusion of the argument is the anarchists should not form unions built on anarchist principles (even ones built on a libertarian character without anarchist ideology). “In general to me it seems better that the anarchists remain, when they can, within the largest possible groupings” (Malatesta 1926 [1] ). Within the unions anarchist argue for anarchist tactics and ideas, and organize against cooptation and authoritarian currents. The structure of the argument then is to begin with the nature of the union [“a union is set up to defend the day to day interests of the workers and to improve their conditions” (Malatesta 1925 [2] ).], elaborate the anarchist’s goals in unions [“in the labour movement I see only a means of raising the morale of the workers, accustom them to free initiative and solidarity in a struggle for the good of everyone and render them capable of imagining, desiring and putting into practice an anarchist life” (Malatesta 1925b [3] ).], derive a contradiction between an anarchist union and a union’s nature [“A labour organisation that were to style itself anarchist, that was and remained genuinely anarchist and was made up exclusively of dyed-in-the-wool anarchists could be a form... of [an] anarchist grouping; but it would not be the labour movement and it would lack the purpose of such a movement, which is to attract the mass of the workers into the struggle, and... to create a vast field for propaganda and to make new anarchists” (Malatesta 1925b)], and conclude that we should organize within the biggest non-ideological unions. Malatesta’s conclusion is actually ambiguous. Within the same paragraph he asserts “The whole point at issue is whether it suits our aims, in terms of action and propaganda, for the labour organisations to be open to all workers, irrespective of philosophical or social creed, or whether they should be split into different political and social tendencies” and finishes with the prior quoted “In general to me it seems better that the anarchists remain, when they can, within the largest possible groupings” (Malatesta 1926). He somehow misses the logical leap between the largest unions, and unions merely open to all workers. The CNT and the IWW of the time had policies of being open to all workers willing to join, though having revolutionary ideology. The issue is further confused when he agrees with Vittorio when the author states ““I disagree that the National Confederation of Labour…
