---
title: "Death of a Small Planet"
author: "Murray Bookchin"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/murray-bookchin-death-of-a-small-planet"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "It’s Growth That’s Killing Us"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "murray-bookchin-death-of-a-small-planet.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/murray-bookchin-death-of-a-small-planet.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We tend to think of environmental catastrophes—such as the recent Exxon Valdez oil-spill disaster in the Bay of Alaska—as “accidents”: isolated phenomena that erupt without notice or warning. But when does the word accident become inappropriate? When are such occurrences inevitable rather than accidental? And when does a consistent pattern of inevitable disasters point to a deep-seated crisis that is not only environmental but profoundly social? President Bush was content to blame the spill of more than ten million gallons of crude petroleum off Valdez Harbor on negligence by a soused sea captain. In fact, however, it was the consequence of social circumstances far more compelling than the usual “human” or “technological” factors cited in mass-media reporting. Since the pipeline at Valdez Harbor went into service a dozen years ago, there have been no fewer than 400 oil spills in the Bay of Alaska. In 1987, the tanker Stuyvesant dumped almost a million gallons into the gulf after leaving Valdez, presumably because of mechanical failures attributed to severe weather. The environmental-protection organization Greenpeace recorded seven spills in Alaskan waters this year even before the Exxon Valdez ran aground. Oil spills ranging from a few thousand gallons to a million or more—as well as the oil routinely flushed out of tankers to make room for return-trip cargoes—have polluted vast areas of the world’s ocean surface and coastline. The appalling effects of oil spills that occurred many years ago are still apparent today, and new incidents keep adding to the damage. The widely publicized 10,000-gallon spill that “mysteriously” polluted the coastal areas of two Hawaiian islands a week after the Exxon Valdez ran aground was more than matched by the little-publicized 117,000 gallons that the Exxon Houston dumped off another Hawaiian coastal area some three weeks before the Valdez spill. On a single day, June 23, 1989, three major spills—off Newport, Rhode Island, in the Delaware River, and on the Texas Gulf Coast—dumped a total of well over one million gallons of oil into U.S. waters Many find it difficult to see these incidents as part of a continuum that has a common source. To trace a chain of events from its cause to its consequence is an unfamiliar task for people who have been conditioned to see life as a television sit-com or talk show composed of discrete self-contained, anecdotal segments. We live, in effect, on a diet of short takes, devoid of logic or long-range effect. Our problems to the extent that we recognize them as problems at all-are episodic rather than systemic; the scene dissolves, the camera moves on. But the present crisis will not disappear with a switch of channels. It was predictable—and predicted—decades ago. There is an all-but-forgotten history of dire portents, urgent warnings, and unsuccessful efforts by an earlier generation of environmentalists to deal with the social factors that underpin environmental problems. In many instances, they predicted with uncanny accuracy the results of ecologically insane policies pursued by the corporate establishment in the West and the bureaucratic establishment in the East. The earliest disputes around the dangers posed by the oil industry’s expansion into oceanic drilling occurred even before the Arctic regions were opened to oil exploitation. They go back well into the 1950s, when larger vessels started being used to transport Middle Eastern oil. Long before spills came to public attention, environmentalists were voicing fears over hazards posed by growing tanker capacity. No less serious than the possibility of “human error” in the operation of these huge vessels was the well-known fact that even the sturdiest ships have a way of being buffeted by storms, drifting off course, foundering on reefs in treacherous waters, and sinking. In lectures I gave decades ago on the Pacifica Radio network, I emphasized the sheer certainty of disastrous oil spills that would sur…
