---
title: "Do or Die Issue 3"
author: "Anonymous, Do or Die"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/do-or-die-anonymous-do-or-die-issue-3"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "As wolves die, so does freedom, hear the warning... the last wolf on this island was killed in 1743!"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "do-or-die-anonymous-do-or-die-issue-3.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/do-or-die-anonymous-do-or-die-issue-3.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Land and Liberty        A Letter From Scotland        Pollock Estate      Action Reports        News from Somerset Some photos, illustrations and other images from the paper edition are not yet included on the website. We the last people on Earth; the last of the free; Have been sheltered till this day by our very remoteness; But now the boundary of Britain has been exposed; Beyond us lies no nation, only rock and waves and the Romans more deadly still; The pirates of this world, who have exhausted the land by plundering and now they ransack the sea; They create desolation and call it peace; Let us then unconquered as we are, ready to fight for freedom, Prove what warriors Caledonia has been holding in reserve. - Calgacus AD 83. For those who are aware of the real history of Scotland, the consequences of the actions taken by the colonial administrators on the Scots are self evident. Individuals took advantage of the shattering of customary law to accrue power and influence for themselves at the expense of their own communities’ collective ownership and security. Traditions stood in the way of profits, so traditions were disregarded. Culture stood in the way of market extension because culture usually involved community ties, solidarity and reciprocity. The wholesale eviction of the indigenous population was then carried out with a blind economic totality and is still a matter touching our innermost feelings. In this rough and ready article emphasis has been placed on the redefining of land as private property and then its transfer to an elite leading to the mass removal of whole communities for financial gain in a process which is alive today. The phasing out of Scotland’s culture was top priority as it offered a real challenge in the form of a viable, self-reliant and alternative way of life which wasn’t massively wealthy, but did tend to protect the poor and regulate injustice. The elimination of the native systems, justified by perpetrators and apologists as improvements has been ignored by the education departments, whose task it is to condition a labour force of ignorant and eager consumers. Private property has been legitimised through the imposition of Anglo law via the Scottish Office. The poll tax and more recently the water privatisation issue serve to reveal the imposed structure of colonialism clearly. The Scottish Office plays a leading role in the undermining of real democracy in Scotland, but they are not alone. The powerful corporate bureaucracy of Strathclyde regional council along with the rest of the regions have shown no resistance to the imposition of the poll tax. Instead they took on board the unpopular tax in co-operation with the Tories and have used all the powers at their disposal to enforce it, showing that they have virtually transferred their allegiance to the colonial regime. Strathclyde region have already been caught out buying water shares south of the border and meeting with prospective developers. The people of Scotland are landless as a result of historic coercion into the capitalist labour force. Glasgow, historically a slave camp of the industrial era, doubling as a reservation for the dispossessed natives, has been assimilated into the British capitalist system. For this relatively new economic order to be adopted by people, firstly their communal systems of land tenure had to be broken so to substitute with private ownership. Assimilation is ongoing and capitalist ideals are enshrined within schools and institutions for that purpose. Accounts of real history are smothered as a calculated act of policy. Defunct economic theory replaces free thought and the mercenary ideology continues to usurp naive intelligence and morality. The cost of this deception is very high and only those who are prepared to dodge their social / cultural integrity find themselves wealthy enough to insulate themselves from the crisis they are helping to create, be they aware of it or not. While a self-destruc…
