---
title: "Anarcho-Stoicism: A Primer"
author: "Jimmy C. Tolbert"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jimmy-c-tolbert-anarcho-stoicism-a-primer"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This is the first in a further exploration of Virtue Theory within an anarchist paradigm. I hope to write more on the subject and respond to criticisms as they arise. This paper was written for a Senior Philosophy Seminar at Rowan University. https://philpapers.org/rec/TOLAAP-3"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jimmy-c-tolbert-anarcho-stoicism-a-primer.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jimmy-c-tolbert-anarcho-stoicism-a-primer.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        I. Framework and Method        II. The Individual        III. The Moral Community        IV. Objections        V. Conclusion        Bibliography This paper explores the connections between and synthesis of Anarchist political philosophy with the ethical systems of the late Roman Stoics. Utilizing a dialectic virtue model, reminisce of Hegelian development, the analysis centers around the ways in which stoic virtue theory can be applied within anarchist social structure and the consequences of such a combination. Anarchism provides a particularly flexible framework for implementation; such a system’s loose structure, with the primary thesis of anti-statism, varies greatly between individuals and groups. Stoic ethics share in anarchism’s need to reconcile the individual moral agent with their role in the moral community, and this connection is one in which the individual sovereignty and the wider community may be brought into a greater degree of flourishing. Stoicism is oft perceived as mostly conservative, yet not out of necessity, while Anarchism’s progressive libertarian nature allows for wide interpretation. A Dialectic Virtue Theory can be utilized as a vehicle to connect these two traditions—Stoicism being it’s exemplar, and Anarchism’s natural freedom of interpretation and practice. Virtue will then be explored as something which, when pursued in earnest, increases the flourishing of the individualist as well as the communitarian. Individual Liberty will take center stage, and as we will see this is echoed in the stoic conceptions of self-discipline; to discipline one’s own individual attainment of virtue will have ripple effects when given the space to do so, and since this discipline does not come from a higher authority (ie. the state), this maps particularly well to anarchist political thought. Hereby the individual is given the utmost freedom to develop their own ethics of virtue while contributing positively to the generalized virtue of the larger community, and both grow evermore sophisticated via this dialectical exploration. This thesis asserts that the system which can be constructed from these traditions is not only preferable, but logically sound, just, and attainable. This then ushers in the newest in a long line of anarchist variance which we shall now call Anarcho-Stoicism. To begin this synthesis, much care must be taken to establish the modes and models used to structure the Anarcho-Stoic ethical system—to construct the system from the root. The first of these roots is the logical method applied, namely, Dialectic Logic . This will be chosen given a key feature: it is certainly historically relevant to anarchist thought, but more importantly it’s dynamic approach to the structure of logic allows the freedom of form, as we will see, characteristic of anarchist conceptions of Liberty and stoic conceptions of Virtue. Dialectic logic is not a rigid code, but rather a methodology in which we may analyze and apply certain beliefs and systems. In opposition to competing models, the dialectic model will be preferred as it supplies a path forward which allows a greater degree of variable exploration and expression. Much of philosophy generally owes it’s success to a dialectic model, but for our purposes it must be known that many of the first anarchists were birthed from the writings of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , the quintessential dialectician of the modernist period. The Young Hegelians of the late 19 th Century, mostly political radicals, read Hegel’s logic as a wholly progressive system which prioritized development, growth, and social revolution. Hegel’s notion of World Spirit is as a self-actualizing force of history; global consciousness develops as it encounters contradiction. As contradiction arises, as is inevitable, the two opposing sides cave in on one another in what Hegel calls Aufheben (to sublate): preservation, change, and advancement of the initial premise. Put simply,…
