---
title: "Egoism Vol. II. No. 4."
author: "James L. Walker, J. William Lloyd, Henry Replogle, Georgia Replogle"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-ii-no-4"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved 02/19/2023 from catalog.hathitrust.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-ii-no-4.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-ii-no-4.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Pointers.      Epicurean.      Editorial Slashes.      Toes Unwittingly Trodden.      Majority Taste Brutality.      The Philosophy of Egoism.        XI.      Emotional Gush Not In It.      Managerial Experience.      Straws in the Breeze.      EGOISM’S PRINCIPLES AND PURPOSE. EGOISM is now printed on a steam press, and is getting up in the world. “Liberty,” of Boston, is changed from an 8-page fortnightly to a 4-page weekly. This is very desirable. Colonel Ingersoll says one man in the right will finally get to be a majority. In this case the degree of right and that of finality will exactly correspond. If a man is very right the finality will impress him quite as seriously as the majority realization. Lillian Harman, one of the publishers of former Fair Play, has gone to Boston to manipulate the leaden alphabet in Benj. R. Tucker’s publishing house. E. C. Walker will probably also be employed in some department of the business. The English Anarchists have formed a Free Trade Extension League and issued a circular with a program of 12 items of governmental prohibition for the abolishment of which they will agitate. A list of subjects and lecturers will soon be issued and the work begun. The last book published by Benj. R Tucker is “Russian Traits and Terrors,” and promises to be a critical and able analysis of that people’s characteristics as well as an authentic and startling description of the atrocities practiced by the Russian government. We have received, but not read it yet. It contains 288 pages and sells at $1.00 in cloth binding, and at 35 cents in paper cover. Address the publisher at Box 3366, Boston. “The Rights of Women and the Sexual Relations,” by Karl Heinzen, announced in the June number, has arrived and been read. To have been written in 1852, it is remarkable for the breadth of its position as well as plainness of analysis and force of conclusion, which makes it excellent matter for propaganda work among the idealistic conservative portion of the community. But a number of monogamy-derived ideals and empirical deductions occurring like interpolations in his magnificent argument are very provoking to the radical reader who finding the author in the very jaws of a bold and consistent conclusion sees him suddenly wheel about and justify by a monogamic prejudice. Those of our readers who only tolerate the paper will be delighted with the book and should circulate it among their conservative friends. It contains 173 pages and sells in cloth for $1.00; paper cover 50 cents. Benj. R. Tucker, Box 3366, Boston, Mass. EGOISM is glad to note the change of the Chicago “Liberal,” formerly an anti-theological paper, into the “Auditor,” a paper devoted to free money and industrial emancipation. It is edited by Alfred B. Westrup, with S. V.Westru1) business manager. Mrs. Freeman, who was publisher of the “Liberal” has severed connection with it except as a contributor. It is a 16-page monthly, printed on excellent paper with large clear type, at $1.00 a year. But for one, and a fatal error, it would be a sound and powerful propagator of Mutual Banking. This error consists in the proposition to issue currency without being denominated in some standard of value; that is, without it being understood that a note of a given denomination will be redeemed in such a quantity of products as would exchange for a definite quantity of some commodity. It is equal, as we understand it, to giving a promissory note without stating the amount to be paid. Of course Mr. Westrup will not admit this, and declares that the Mutual Bank dollar taken in lieu of current money would express how much product the note calls for. So it would, but only because the Mutual Bank dollar is measured by the current dollar and the current dollar represents a definite quantity of gold or silver. It is easy to print a note but impossible to tell what to give for it without knowing its denomination and impossible to denominate it without doing so in some def…
