---
title: "Black Seed: Issue 8"
author: "Skoden, Goat, Sapé, Anpoa Duta Collective, Indigenous Action, Armando Resendez, Dominique Ganawaabi, Anonymous, Aragorn!, Klee Benally, Aunt Loretta, Leona"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-black-seed-issue-8"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A journal of indigenous anarchy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-black-seed-issue-8.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-black-seed-issue-8.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Welcome to the eighth edition of Black Seed journal.      An Obituary for Aragorn! by Leona      Weary Warrior by Aunt Loretta      The Burden of Our Travels by Klee Benally      Locating An Indigenous Anarchism by Aragorn!        First Principles        Anarchist in spirit vs. Anarchist in word        Native People are not gone      Indigenous Anarchist Convergence – Report Back 1      Fire Walk with Me: IAC reportback 2      Contrasts at the Boundary Lines: A Chat with Armando Resendez by Dominique Ganawaabi      Rethinking the Apocalypse: An Indigenous Anti-Futurist Manifesto      The Anpoa Duta Collective Part 2: a conversation with Aragorn!      Anti-Colonial Hxstory: Colonization is a plague      Ongoing Colonization Continues to Desecrate Occupied Hia Ced O’odham Jewed by Sapé!        Liberation Through Dismantling Borders and Barriers        The O’odham Anti-Border Collective        Recognition Strategy        Where Militarization and Freeways Intersect        Being Anti-Border is Being for Indigenous Land and Life      Voting is Not Harm Reduction by Klee Benally & friends from Indigenous Action        The Native Vote: A Strategy of Colonial Domination        Assimilation: The Strategy of Enfranchisement        You can’t decolonize the ballot        Rejecting settler colonial authority, aka not voting.      COVID-19, Resource Colonialism & Indigenous Resistance by Klee Benally        The Navajo Resource Colony & COVID-19        Food Deserts: A Project of Colonial Violence        A Virulent Faith        Missionizing Charity & Allyship        Indigenous Mutual Aid is Necessary        Prophecy & Medicine      Your loneliness is a public health problem by Goat        We are so lonely because we have no one to talk to        We have no one to talk to because we have nothing to say        We will not live as things that think about money        We will not live in the complete absence of meaning        You are not alone, except in dealing with the entirety of your life.        We feel the urge to explode just the same as you do        You may speak with everyone now that you have nothing to say        If society betrays all desire        Because nothing satisfies        Abolish the clock        Because life is too tense        To be on the side of spirit        Your loneliness is a public health problem        Because there are barricades in our hearts      Stand-up to be Performed at the Next Disaster by Skoden This issue was meant to be published in the winter of 2020, but we were devastated in February by the passing of our co-editor, friend, lover, and Black Seed originator, Aragorn! Finishing this issue has been an unintentional practice in group mourning. Two obituaries from people with intimate relations to Aragorn! and Black Seed open this issue. In addition, the world has been wracked by the COVID-19 pandemic, and although we at Black Seed quietly (and not so quietly) invite in the mayhem, one consequence of this pre-apocalyptic event is that this edition will sail more slowly than usual on the winds of distribution. We suspect it might not find its way to you until later this summer or fall. In our last issue we labeled our changes up til now as being “a journal for Indigenous Anarchism” without explanation. Here we’ll flesh out that change at least a little more. This project was made by green anarchists who feel that a green anarchist perspective was incomplete. Sure, we started this project partly to distinguish ourselves from primitivism, but we are also dissatisfied with other perspectives called Green, like Green Capitalism, Social Ecology, and other fixed positions. We recognize Green Anarchism, Anarchism, and even ideological Indigeneity as moving targets. Those of us who are post-Indians tour the ideologies that poorly liberate us, full well knowing that the task remains ours, and celebrating that we have each other and the power to go beyond the language and limitations others have for us. This has …
