---
title: "A Critique of Communism and The Individualist Alternative"
author: "Ken Knudson"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ken-knudson-a-critique-of-communism-and-the-individualist-alternative"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First fully published in Non Serviam #1–12, serialized from January to July 1993. Retrieved 10/24/2021 from http://www.spunk.org/texts/misc/sp000050.txt"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ken-knudson-a-critique-of-communism-and-the-individualist-alternative.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ken-knudson-a-critique-of-communism-and-the-individualist-alternative.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ​A Note to Readers        ​Communism: For the Common Good        ​Revolution: The Road to Freedom?        Egoism: The Philosophy of Freedom        ​Capitalism: Freedom Perverted        ​Mutualism: The Economics of Freedom        An Afterword to Communist-Anarchist Readers I address myself in these pages primarily to those readers of “Anarchy” who call themselves “communist- anarchists.” It is my purpose in this article to show that this label is a contradiction in terms and that anyone accepting it must do so by a lack of clear understanding of what the words “anarchist” and “communist” really mean. It is my hope that in driving a wedge between these two words, the communist side will suffer at the expense of the anarchist. I make no claims to originality in these pages. Most of what I have to say has been said before and much better. The economics is taken primarily from the writings of Pierre- Joseph Proudhon, William B. Greene, and Benjamin R. Tucker. The philosophy from Max Stirner, Tucker again, and, to a lesser extent, James L. Walker. I hope you won’t be put off by my clumsy prose. I’m a scientist by trade, not a professional writer. I implore you, therefore, not to mistake style for content. If you want both the content and good style may I suggest Tucker’s “Instead of a Book”. Unfortunately, this volume has been out of print since 1897, but the better libraries – especially those in the United States – should have it. If you can read French, I recommend the economic writings of Proudhon. “General Idea of the Revolution in the Nineteenth Century” is particularly good and has been translated into English by the American individualist, John Beverley Robinson. (Freedom Press, 1923). Also in English is Tucker’s translation of one of Proudhon’s earliest works, the well-known “What is Property?”. This book is not as good as the “General Idea” book, but it has the advantage of being currently available in paperback in both languages. A word of warning: unless you are thoroughly familiar with Proudhon, I would not recommend the popular Macmillan “Papermac” edition of “Selected Writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon”; they seem to have been selected with irrelevance as their only criterion. Like so many other great writers, Proudhon suffers tremendously when quoted out of context and this particular edition gives, on average, less than a page per selection. Better to read his worst book completely than to be misled by disconnected excerpts like these. Finally the individualist philosophy, egoism, is best found in Max Stirner’s “The Ego and His Own”. This book suffers somewhat from a very difficult style (which wasn’t aided by Stirner’s wariness of the Prussian censor), but if you can get through his obscure references and biblical quotes, I think you will find the task worth the effort. H. L. Mencken once observed that just because a rose smells better than a cabbage doesn’t mean to say it makes a better soup. I feel the same way about individualist anarchism. At first whiff, the altruist rose may smell better than the individualist cabbage, but the former sure makes a lousy soup. In the following pages I hope to show that the latter makes a better one. Ken Knudson Geneva, Switzerland March, 1971 “Communism is a 9 letter word used by inferior magicians with the wrong alchemical formula for transforming earth into gold.” – Allen Ginsberg, “ Wichita Vortex Sutra” By way of prelude to the individualist critique of communism, I should like to look briefly at the communist- anarchists’ critique of their Marxist brothers. Anarchists and Marxists have traditionally been at odds with one another: Bakunin and Marx split the First International over their differences a century ago; Emma Goldman virtually made her living in the 1920’s from writing books and magazine articles about her “disillusionment in Russia”; in May, 1937, the communists and anarchists took time off from their war against Franco to butcher each other in the streets…
