---
title: "Backwoods No. 1"
author: "Hakim Bey, Eera Sylvain, Kanzan Kitsune, Sylvia Wilde, Toby Hemenway, Bellamy Fitzptrick"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-backwoods-issue-1"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Journal of Anarchy and Wortcunning"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-backwoods-issue-1.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-backwoods-issue-1.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Excerpts        Anti-copyright      Welcome to the Backwoods      An Invitation to Desertion        The Crisis of Modern Civilization        The Politics of “The End of History”        The Failure of Alternative Political Ideologies        The False Liberations of Minimalist Anarchism        Leviathan and the Civitas        Desertion        Autarky        Reinhabitation        Our Invitation        Works Cited      Pockets of Happiness      A Forest Garden Primer        Works Cited      The Garden Path      On Subsistence & Slavery        The Economics of Slavery        The Slavery of Economics        Subsistence, Autarky, and Anarchy        Works Cited      Reviews        In Search of the Masterless Men of Newfoundland        Anti-Tech Revolution: Why and How        Permaculture: Practical Solutions Beyond Sustainability        Permaculture Design: Regenerating Life Together      Against Sustainability We indict the Civilization of Leviathan as a truly insane way of life predicated on the creation of States to enforce the enslavement of the many so that the parasitic few may acquire absurd wealth and influence. Such social relations are poisonous to all involved, being based on venality and coercion, ridiculous commodity fetishism, and the death of real human community through domination and atomization. We refuse the techno-industrial logic that treats the beautiful tapestry of the living world as just so much grist for the mill, as an unliving “resource” to be “developed” — that is, to be endlessly plundered and paved, extirpated of life, and replaced by parking lots, factory farms, waste dumps, extraction sites, and our apartment complexes and offices that fittingly resemble battery cages. We champion anarchy: the freedom that comes from conscious selfownership and voluntary relations of mutuality with our human and nonhuman kin in small, autarkic, face-to-face communities based in a regenerative relationship with the land and the whole of the nonhuman world. We embrace the vivacity that comes from deeply ecologically harmonious ways of life and the sense of place, presence, and fulfillment that comes from nourishing and being nourished by an enveloping, living world full of consciousness and agency. Edited by Bellamy Fitzpatrick, Fera Sylvain, and Thuggy Whiskers, PhD. Backwoods is published twice a year by Enemy Combatant, publishers of anarchist books and pamphlets, with an eye to small scale, low-tech, and natural materials, as much as is possible within the bowels of leviathan. Subscriptions are $15/year. Individual issues are $10 ($5/copy for 10+ copies). Please send cash or equivalent amount in postage stamps only (no checks). Address correspondence, content submissions, and subscriptions to Backwoods, PO Box 238, Poestenkill, NY 12140. Backwoods may also be obtained from EC Publications PO Box 1014, Jacksonville, OR 97530. (Cash or postage stamps only) Little Black Cart www.littleblackcart.com Anti-copyright. Backwoods may be reprinted at will for non-profit purposes. We are writing Backwoods as a kind of suture in journal form, an effort to bring together in readership and communication two disparate radical tendencies in North America: those belonging to the anarchist milieux and those of the permaculture milieux. We aim to create a platform for dialogue, critique, and inspiration between and within these sets of radicals and thus bring to the fore fresh perspectives on the liberatory possibilities remaining in this late period of our shared crises in the bowels of Leviathan, our world-eating and enslaving civilization. As people who each independently became aware of anarchism and permaculture almost simultaneously in our lives, the two have always seemed obviously complementary to us: anarchism is the critique, the vision, the social ethics; and permaculture is the design, the ecological ethics, the way of reharmonizing ourselves with our world. We imagined many others shared our view, elementary as it s…
