---
title: "From Crisis to Communisation"
author: "Gilles Dauvé"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gilles-dauve-from-crisis-to-communisation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: ""
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gilles-dauve-from-crisis-to-communisation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gilles-dauve-from-crisis-to-communisation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     COMMUNISATION AND MY DISCONTENT      CHAPTER 1: LEGACY        § 1: Back to the 1960s–70s        § 2: Three Steps to Capitalist Dominion        § 3: Excursus          3.1: Back to ’68          3.2: The General Strike, an Eye-Opener          3.3 Maturation          3.4 Portugal and Poland: Inextricable Problem and Solution      CHAPTER 2: BIRTH OF A NOTION        § 1: End of Classism          1.1: Classism in Crisis          1.2: Class Out of Fashion          1.3: The All-Inclusive Class ( Operaismo )          1.4 From Class to Individuals        § 2: Facing the Conundrum        § 3: The Common Good        § 4: “Adieu to disappointment and spleen” (Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice )        § 5: In a Nutshell        § 6: If It’s That Simple, Why … ?        § 7: The Word      CHAPTER 3: WORK UNDONE          Road Work Unreal        § 1: Working Substance          1.1: Work Is Class          1.2: Work Reduces Every Activity to a Common Substance          1.3: Wage-Labour Turns Work into a Commodity          1.4: Work Is Separation          1.5: Work Is Productivity and Accountancy          1.6: Work Is Reducing Everything to a Minimum of Time          1.7: Under the Rule of Work        § 2: Neither Work nor Economy          2.1: Production Is Not Economy          2.2: Communism as Activity      CHAPTER 4: CRISIS OF CIVILISATION        § 1: Why “Civilisation”?        § 2: A European Civil War        § 3: How Capitalism Globalised Its Crisis of the 1960s and ’70s        § 4: Neoliberalism Fallacy        § 5: Wages, Price, and Profit        § 6: The Impossibility of Reducing Everything to Time        § 7: Shareholder Capitalism        § 8: A Class Out of Joint        § 9: The Money God That Fails        § 10: Quantifying the Qualitative (When the Disease Becomes the Medicine)        § 11: Forbidden Planet?        § 12: No Capitalist Self-Reform        § 13: Deadlock        § 14: No “Creative Destruction” … Yet        § 15: Social Reproduction, So Far …      CHAPTER 5: TROUBLE IN CLASS        § 1: Resistance          1.1: The Autonomy Paradox          1.2: Autonomy/Communisation          1.3: Labour Movement Resurgence          1.4: Proletarian Drive and Bourgeois Outcome        § 2: Going Beyond Class?          2.1 Occupy/Transform          2.2: Radical-Reformist Complication        § 3: Communism as Ideology        § 4: The Improbable Art of Crisis Assessment        § 5: No Revolutionary Subject without Subjectivity      CHAPTER 6: CREATIVE INSURRECTION        § 1: An Anti-work and Anti-proletarian Insurrection?          1.1: Self-Critique of Work          1.2: Anti-proletarian Acts        § 2: From Work to Activity?        § 3: How Will Communisation Satisfy People’s Basic Needs?        § 4: Abundance v. Scarcity?        § 5: A World without Money?        § 6: Parasitic Activities?        § 7: Too Late to Save the Planet?        § 8: Daily Life Changes or Big Issues?        § 9: From Worker to After-Dinner Critic?        § 10: What about Gender?        § 11: What about Violence?        § 12: Who Would Be the Communisers?        § 13: Reaching the Tipping Point?        § 14: How Relevant Is This Questions and Answers List?      CHAPTER 7: A VERITABLE SPLIT        § 1: Polemics        § 2: It Takes More Than a Step Aside        § 3: Decoupling Proletarian from Worker          3.1: The Two-Stage Postulate          3.2: What Worker Identity?          3.3: The Great Simplifier          3.4: The Ratchet Effect          3.5: “I Bring You Good Tidings”        § 4: Crossover Identity Politics        § 5: The Proletariat as a Contradiction      ABOUT THE AUTHOR “For several years now, the theme of communisation has led to controversies that are very often ill-informed,” Bruno Astarian wrote in 2010. [1] An understatement. In recent years, communisation has become one of the radical in-words, whose popularity extends far beyond the regrettably called “communisers.” In a transatlantic game of Chinese whispers, the notion has developed into …
