---
title: "Is Black and Red Dead?"
author: "Christopher Wellbrook, Suzi Weissman, Jérémy Tranmer, George Sotiropoulos, Paul B. Smith, Andy Robinson, Larry Portis, Philip O’Sullivan, Mike Mowbray, Sara C. Motta, Lewis H. Mates, Renzo Llorente, Carl Levy, Jean Michel Kay, Christian Høgsbjerg, Christian Garland, Simon Choat, Benoît Challand, Alex Prichard, Chiara Bottici, Toby Boraman, Jean-Christophe Angaut"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-is-black-and-red-dead"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An academic conference organised and supported by the PSA Anarchist Studies Network, the PSA Marxism Specialist Group, Anarchist Studies, Capital &amp; Class, Historical Materialism, Critique—Journal of Socialist Theory (Political Studies Association—PSA). The conference was hosted by the Centre for"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-is-black-and-red-dead.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-is-black-and-red-dead.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-is-black-and-red-dead)

(New) New Left?: radical considerations in Canada and Quebec from the post-1968 moment to today

New Left: ‘les annees 1968’ in Quebec & ‘the revolutionary youth movement’

The ‘revolutionary youth movement’ in Our Generation and Noir et Rouge

Spontaneity, the counter-culture & the Sociology of Marcel Rioux

Councilist anarchism and carnival anarchism during the 1970s: a case study

International Context: The Rise of ‘Councilism,’ Modern Class Struggle Anarchism, And Carnival Anarchism

Phase 1: The Era of ‘Great Radicalisation’ (Late 1960s, Early 1970s)

Post-Left Anarchism, Open Marxism and ‘New’ Autonomist Social Movements in Latin America: Convergence through the praxis of rebel subjects

Latin America’s autonomist social movements: The pedagogy of practise

The (Anti-) Politics of Autonomy: Between Marxism and Anarchism

Theory, Ideology, and Tradition: Reconciling Anarchism and Marxism

Comparing the relative efficacy of different types of class struggle

Can Marxist and Anarchist explanations of the class struggle between Capitalists and workers be reconciled?

Centralisation and decentralisation in the mode of leadership

And never the twain shall meet: The psychological foundations of political ideology

Moral Theory and Economics: The beginnings and ends of the schism ...

Red and Black Christians: Some Similarities and Differences between Liberation Theology and Christian Anarchism

Ideology and Politics: Overcoming the divide between red and black

‘ A Bedouin, perhaps, a Citizen, never’ (?): Overcoming the Red and Black divide

Black and red: an historical-philosophical enquiry into their convergence

Beyond black and red: Situationists and the legacy of the workers movement

Constructing an alternative to Marxism-Leninism: British Communists and prefigurative politics

Collegamenti Wobbly: Beyond the anarchist/Marxist dichotomy?’

Fabbri and the Marxists: A comparative analysis of Fabbri, Gramsci and Bordiga on the question of revolutionary organisation

2. Pre-figuration and the ‘Libertarian Gramsci’: Gramsci, Antonio Labriola and the Anarchists

3. Cooperation and Pre-figuration: Gramsci, Sorel and the Anarchists

4. Free Thought and Educated Thought: the Origins of the Gramscian concepts Senso Comune and Senso Buono (the Limits of Gramscian Libertarianism)

7. Anarchism as the Highest Form of Sovversivismo (Levy, 2007)

When Anarchism meets Critical Marxism: Paths and Paradoxes of “Socialisme ou Barbarie” (and of Trotskyism)

2. Trotskyism cuts both ways: Lessons from the period 1945 to now

3. The contribution of Socialisme ou Barbarie. When Anarchy (partially) meets Marxism

Bakunin and Marx on the Paris Commune: Grounds for a synthesis between Anarchism and Marxism?

C.L.R. James’ Black Bloc: The Anti-Racist Roots of Contemporary Anarchism

A ‘Bohemian freelancer’? C.L.R. James, his early relationship to anarchism and the intellectual origins of autonomism

The Syndicalist challenge in the Durham coalfield before 1914

Lessons Taken from the Greek Uprising: The Marxist-Anarchist Controversy Reconsidered In and Through Radical Praxis

The Search for a Libertarian Communism: Daniel Guérin, Marxism and Anarchism

Beyond the Rainbow: Overcoming Dogma and Confusion in the Articulation of Revolutionary Theory and Practice

Overcoming Dogma and Confusion in Revolutionary Theory and Practice: Red and Black in Historical Perspective

Ideals and authoritarian socialism: Dialectics of “Bad Faith”

Towards a reassertion of a “Red and Black” revolutionary praxis

Autonomy, Self-Organization, and the Spatial Composition of the Social Imaginary

Beyond ‘Red’ and ‘Black’: Publishing in the pursuit of libertarian socialism

“Crowned heads, wealth and privilege may well tremble should ever again the Black and Red unite!”

—Otto Von Bismark, upon hearing of the split in the First International

What is the political relevance of the ideological labels “anarchist” and “Marxist” in the contemporary geo-political climate? Despite recurrent crisis, the costs typically borne by the people, neoliberal capitalism continues to colonize the globe in a never ending quest for profit and new enclosures. Meanwhile, an effective political response from the left to the wars, ecological destruction, financial collapse and social problems created by capital and state has so far failed to garner the widespread support and influence it needs. Indeed, the sectarianism of the left may well have contributed to this failure. Still, despite fracture, there have always been borrowings across the left. Most recently, post-’68 radicalisms have contributed to a blurring of the divisions between the anarchist and Marxist traditions. Traditionally regarded as hostile and irreconcilable, many of these ideas find expression in the “newest social movements,” taking inspiration from the Situationists, left communists, and social anarchist traditions. The anti-statist, libertarian currents within the socialist movement have repeatedly emerged during periods of acute political and economic crisis, from the council communists to revolutionary anarchism. Is this one such historical juncture in which dynamic reconciliation is not only welcomed but vital? To rephrase the question, what can we learn from 150 years of anti-statist, anti-capitalist social movements, and how might this history inform the formulation of a new social and political current, consciously combining the insights of plural currents of anarchism and Marxism in novel historical junctures? Indeed, to what extent have these traditional fault lines been constitutive of the political imagination? The modern feminist, queer, ecological, anti-racist and postcolonial struggles have all been inspired by and developed out of critiques of the traditional parameters of the old debates, and many preceded them. So, to what extent do capital and the state remain the key sites of struggle?

We welcome papers that engage critically with both the anarchist and the Marxist traditions in a spirit of reconciliation. We welcome historical papers that deal with themes and concepts, movements or individuals. We also welcome theoretical papers with demonstrable historical or political importance. Our criteria for the acceptance of papers will be mutual respect, the usual critical scholarly standards and demonstrable engagement with both traditions of thought. Please send 350 word abstracts (as word documents), including full contact details, to: Dr Alex Prichard (ESML, University of Bath): a.prichard@bath.ac.uk

Since its foundation the ASN has had as its primary aim to foster institutional and interpersonal links between those working in the broad area of anarchist studies. The success of our first conference at Loughborough University in September 2008 was the product of three years of hard work to build this area of research. At the meeting that followed this first conference, it was suggested that a conference be held on the intersections between Marxism and anarchism. One year later, this conference is the idea made real. Our primary aim as a research network was to reach out to Marxist scholars and begin a new dialogue between the two traditions of thought. The secondary aim was to provide a space for people who felt they crossed the boundaries between Marxism and anarchism to present their work and discuss their ideas in a supportive and convivial environment.

The result was the first conference in living memory on the intersections between Marxism and anarchism. It was hosted by the Centre for the Study of Social and Global Justice at the University of Nottingham. The conference convenor was Dr Alex Prichard, co-founder of the Anarchist Studies Network. Saku Pinta drafted the initial call for papers and Dr Dave Berry worked to ensure the radical book stalls were part of the conference. The conference was convened in conjunction with the PSA Marxism Specialist Group. Special thanks to Professor Marc Cowling for his support with our bid to the PSA for funding. The event was also supported by four academic journals: Anarchist Studies, Capital and Class, Critique-Journal of Socialist Theory, Historical Materialism and Studies in Marxism. Special thanks also go to Sue Simpson at Nottingham University for her extensive administrative work, to Dr Tony Burns, co-director of the CSSGJ, for his coordination and for the financial assistance provided through the Centre, and to the Political Studies Association for a generous grant of £2000 to support the event.

The conference attracted 42 papers and a further 20 participants. It was a truly international conference with participants from the US, Canada, Australia, France, Italy, Greece, Ireland, Finland, and the UK. The range of topics reflected the geographic spread of the presenters and the spread of the case studies and movements analysed. The experiences of key individuals, such as Antonio Gramsci, Cornelius Castoriadis, C. L R. James and a number of others encapsulated the controversies, trade-offs and developments in socialist thinking by refusing doctrinaire positions on ideology. The historical papers each in their own way illustrated that there are multiple anarchisms and multiple Marxisms; their form changing according to the heritage of the traditions crossed, fused or transcended and the demands of the contexts in which these ideologies morphed and met. Each paper also illustrated how different contexts have created different forms of political agency over the past 150 years.

More theoretical papers discussed the analytical and conceptual problems involved in either explaining the traditional schism on the left or ways of overcoming it. Some called for clarity in method while investigating the schism, while others saw insurmountable philosophical problems in overcoming it. Papers on psychology, moral philosophy, liberation theology and Christian anarchism, the reconfiguring of the notion of ‘the excluded’ and others, all pushed their audience to think more clearly about the terms of the debate and the ontology and epistemology of political agency. Papers on publishing for the cause of revolutionary socialism and others on organising for social change all captured something of the experience of the past 150 years of socialist debate.

The discussions generated by the conference papers were always engaged and heated as well as respectful and generous; debate at the bar, post-conference, no less so! It is testament to the paper-givers and participants that such a difficult topic could be engaged with with such erudition and integrity. It is our ambition that an edited collection of the best essays from the conference be published as soon as possible.

The conference was also attended by AK Press, Sparrow’s Nest (a Nottingham-based anarchist collective), Stair Books, while a number of University and other academic publishers sent in promotional material and books for sale. The conference did not host a plenary speaker, mainly because no one could think of an appropriate speaker to talk to both traditions. Indeed, if such a speaker could be found, someone who would be un-contentiously accepted by all, then there would have been far less purpose behind such a conference in the first place. It was also perhaps quite telling of the history of the left over the past 150 years that so few papers engaged with feminism and so few women presented (5/42). Childcare issues arose. Efforts were made prior to the conference to cater for these, but the University did not have the appropriate facilities. Also, disabled access was a problem which will not be overlooked by this organiser again. While we did our best to arrange the schedule in appropriate buildings, our choice of venue could have been better. The conference did not have a closing open plenary meeting where people could share their experiences of the event. This will be scheduled into any future conferences. Audio recordings were planned but those plans fell apart at the last minute. Some of the conference papers are available on line at http://www.anarchist-studies-network.org.uk/IsBlackAndRedDead .

This paper begins with so-called ‘New Left’ in the particular context of Canada and of Quebec — as seen through the lens of some radical publications. I will begin with a note on the notions of the ‘New Left’ itself, and with a thumbnail sketch of the local socio-political developments and prominent aspects of radical contention relevant to the Quebec-Canada context. Subsequently, I examine some ideas and expressions of the New Left, as emerged in the pages of the twin Montreal publications Our Generation and Noir et Rouge in the explosive climate of the later 1960s, a period referred to in French as “les annees 1968.” Discussing the notion of the “revolutionary youth movement” (and its early theorization by Quebec sociologist Marcel Rioux in particular) in relation some of the broader currents and debates in Quebec left radicalism at the time, I hope to indicate some of contours of this particular case. In so doing, I will point to some aspects of convergence, and of friction, between Marxist and anarchist-influenced interpreters of what many saw as a potentially revolutionary historical moment — particularly over questions of nationalism, organization and counter-culture, considerations which I hope to show have molded some of the problematics exemplified in the radical press today. In concluding, I will try to touch on a contemporary counterpoint, flipping the calendar forward 35 years from the end point of this extended historical moment, and note recent efforts to conceptualize a ‘New New Left’ in the pan-Canadian journal Upping the Anti. Finally, I bring the discussion back to Quebec. In this particular context, I suggest (drawing on the anarchist publications Ruptures and La Mauvaise Herbe) that although the contemporary anarchist contributions have predominantly rejected Quebecois nationalism (at least explicitly), many current tensions — particularly over organization and the debates pitting ‘social’ or class-struggle against ‘lifestyle’ or radical-pluralist (and often ‘counter-cultural’) anarchism — remain as vestiges of the New Left problematic exemplified by recourse to the “revolutionary youth movement.”

‘New Left’ is a term broadly applied to those movements and political ideas which emerged in opposition to both “an ‘obsolete communism’ and a ‘sold-out social democracy‘(McKay 2005:183)” during the 1960s and 70s. Highlighted internationally by such paroxysmal moments as May 1968 and the Chicago Democratic National Convention, a typical New Left politics rejected Western industrial capitalism (associated with American imperialism, conformity and crass exploitation) as well as the ‘real-existing’ socialism of the USSR (in light of the 1956 revelations and an analysis of Soviet bureaucratic statism). Very generally, elements of the New Left sought to transcend the alienation of the individual in economic, cultural and psychological terms through creative action and the progressive elimination of both structural constraints and institutional authority, and tended also to prioritize decolonization and an end to military aggression.

In Quebec, the influence of May 1968 — which one might expect to be great given shared language and national history — was largely secondary to American influences, counter-cultural and political and to endemic tendencies tied to a newly awakened Marxist and anti-colonial consciousness. The province has a large francophone majority which has always been conscious of its subordinate position in both pre-and post-Confederation Canada, and young radicals increasingly came to view this as analogous both to Third World colonization and, famously, to the situation of American blacks — a position propounded by Pierre Vallieres in his book ‘Les Negres Blancs d’Amerique.’ By the mid-1960s, a concerted ‘independantiste’ movement, itself highly divided, had taken hold, and life in Montreal was marked by the simmering low-level terrorist activities of the Front de Liberation de Quebec (FLQ).

The so-called ‘Quiet Revolution’ of the 1960s saw secular soft-nationalist elements in the provincial Liberal party pull the province of out of its decidedly conservative Catholic past in favour of a technocratic planning-state which quickly built up a Keynesian base for the social and economic betterment of the Quebecois and ushered in an intense cultural liberalization. The period was also marked by significant radicalization and consolidation of peace, students,’ workers,’ and feminist groups in Quebec, simultaneously and sometimes in conjunction with Quebec national-liberation movements linked to a logic of decolonialization and which saw the progress of the Quiet Revolution as decidedly insufficient. The case of the New Left in Quebec is complicated by the national movements’ sparring ideological stances, drawing on anti-colonial discourse and a hard-wrought sense of national (collective) identity forged in the crucible of the relative cultural and economic marginalization of the province’s French-speaking majority — and by tensions between these movements and a broader pan-Canadian ‘New Left.’

Periodization is, of course, a problematic exploit, particularly with respect to the New Left, so often lumped under the banner of a decade — the 1960s — or focused on a single year, 1968. For the sake of expediency, I frame my discussion in terms of the rough periodization of ‘les annees 1968,’ (the 1968 years) comprising roughly 1968–1970. This is a period marked by an intense demographic spike — the ‘baby — boom’ generation — and the extension of educational opportunities to portions of the population previously excluded, which concentrated much of the action in the student milieu. Commentators on ‘les annees 1968’ in Quebec point to radicals’ emphasis on ‘direct action’ and the refusal of cooperation or ‘participation’ (in rupture with prior left student union lobbying) which invoked spontaneism, utopian idealism and intense collective frustration. The very concept of representative organization was put in question, as the main student union, UGEQ, dissolved itself as “unrepresentative,” and failed to reconstitute. Here we see a portion of the student or ’youth’ constituency engaging a loosely ‘anarchist’ (more properly radical libertarian) current common to the less politically astute Cohn-Bendit and Jerry Rubin-inspired protesters — though often with a minimum of conceptual articulation. As one ‘contestataire’ put it “L’anarchie, c’est faire ce que tu es, et rien d’autre (Paiement 1969, cf. Warren 2008a: 117). In this context, tensions emerged not only among Quebec left-nationalist movements and between such movements and a broader ‘New Left,’ but also between different Marxist and anarchist-influenced interpreters of revolutionary prospects for ‘les annees 1968,’ and between the less articulated politics of an explosive counter-culture and those who sought a well-considered path to social revolution.

Actions at post-secondary institutions (and many high schools) were prominent, including a widespread student strike in Quebec junior colleges (or CEGEPS) in 1968, numerous occupations and confrontations with institutional administrations, government, and sometimes police, capped by the so-called “Operation McGill francais,” in which 12,000 people demanded official unilingualism and that the prestigious university (McGill) be put in service of the francophone majority. A high point of radical popular contestation, ‘les annees 1968’ brought together a host of immediate demands (for free schooling, unilingualism, better terms of collective bargaining) and wider political objectives (national liberation and independence, an end to capitalist exploitation, cultural liberalization). The October 1968 student strikes and occupations in Quebec (mainly centered in Montreal), while often invoking the name and organizing frame of anarchism, seem to mark an invocation of the optimistic belief that spontaneous radicalization and mass social solidarity with activist struggles would bring the state and corporate powers to their knees (Warren 2008a); this is not dissimilar to some accounts of the relationship between May 1968 and anarchism in France (e.g. Baillargeon 2004) — though such accounts fail to acknowledge the political commitments of even the most famously irreverent, such as the Situationists. For some radical publications, this ethos stayed on as an animating theme; for others, it stood out as a hopeful sign, though one associated with a perceived lack of a firm theoretical base, which prompted ‘New Left’ publications such as Our Generation and Noir et Rouge to theorize and seek to mold a “revolutionary youth movement.”

The emergence of the New Left internationally was marked by “a massive outpouring of publications (McKay 2005: 183)”; by the late 1960s, the desire of opposition groups, often contending amongst themselves, for effective communications gave rise to a number of independent publications in Quebec (Raboy 1983). As it happens, one of the most prominent ‘New Left’ publications with a pan-Canadian orientation was based in Montreal — which entailed taking a stab at the Gordian knot of complications affecting radical-left analysis in Quebec. Our Generation emerged from the student/anti-war movement, self-identified with the ‘New Left,’ espoused an admixture of marxist, left-libertarian, and anarchist arguments under the rubric of a non-violent extra-parliamentary opposition movement with revolutionary aspirations. The September 1966 edition begins with an “editorial statement on Quebec” avowing a commitment to make “social developments in Quebec [...] a permanent feature,” and content during ‘les annees 1968’ reflects this commitment — though the emphasis on ‘youth’ as revolutionary agent seems to represent an attempt to bridge class, ethnic and national tensions. As such, it brings in a strong universalism in tension with particular group claims.

The short-lived Noir et Rouge (“la revue trimestrielle de la nouvelle gauche quebecoise”)emerged as a kind of French-language sister publication in the aftermath of the student revolt and advanced similar positions, with several articles cross-published in translation. The latter publication, although it does not include the kinds of explicit repudiation of national-liberation as a path to social revolution which sometimes made the pages of Our Generation (though notably alongside more positive evaluations acknowledging the reality represented by the composition of Quebec radical constituencies), does relegate such considerations to secondary status in its insistence on the student movement as a key actor which required a move back to the organizational drawing board (reconstituting and revitalizing a dissolved provincial student union). Its primary concern lay with the Quebec student movement — with two of three issues devoted entirely to the topic — and with disseminating a vision of non-violent direct action and a synthesis of Marxist and anarchist theoretical perspectives (often adapted to include critiques of bureaucracy and homogenization in consumer society) including work by Daniel Guerin, Thoreau and Ramus.

Both publications exhibited a sometimes tense interplay between Marxist and anarchist currents in the thought of radical movements, foregrounding both...

While my work focuses on these two journals, there are of course many others. For example, any discussion of Quebec radical publications in the 1960s cannot fail to acknowledge the importance of the review Parti Pris. Whether as a source of inspiration or as the foil against which others were forced to define their positions, the journal espoused a revolutionary etapisme (stage-ism), an approach which privileged Quebec independence as a pre-condition for an equitable socialism. Some, such as the journal Mobilisation (linked to the Mouvement pour une Liberation Populaire, or MLP and to the dissident McGill University professor and avowed Marxist Stanley Gray), by contrast, took a stand against the Parti Pris position and argued that the ‘neo-nationalism’ and technocratic management ascendant in the Quiet Revolution would simply see to the formation of an endemic bourgeoisie and leave the economic bases of exploitation untouched (a position advanced by some authors in Our Generation and implicit in the quest for a more universal construction of revolutionary agency throughout both Our Generation and Noir et Rouge). Serious-minded Marxist theory and national liberation strategy, however, were not always the main focus of publishing efforts on the left. The Quartier Latin, to provide just one other example, thrived on irreverent political commentary, arts coverage, poetry, humour and cartooning: despite criticism for it’s “spontaneity and lack of ideological precision,” it printed 30,000 copies semimonthly at the end of the 60s — far more than the ‘serious’ journals.

As an ensemble, the radical publications of this historical moment (like the student struggles) represented a convergence of ideas and interests concerned with revolutionary struggle — though by no means one in which consistent positions on relative priorities or tactics. Both Our Generation and Noir et Rouge took their distance from the sex-drugs-and-rock’n’roll aspects of the emergent American-inspired counter-culture (unlike the Quartier Latin);, and (nominally) from the loose radical libertarian spontaneism noted with regard to elements of the student movement; while incorporating the general ethos of a ‘peace and love’ revolution and a marked concern for issues of personal autonomy, its contributors generally maintained a focus on what might be called the ‘serious business’ of politics. The counter-culture in the student movement was seen as a resource, a pool of antiauthoritarian energy and feeling. As Our Generation editor-in-chief Dimitrious Roussopoulos (later publisher of Black Rose books, and long-time activist) put it in his 1970 article ‘Towards a Revolutionary Youth Movement,’ which shares a title with Mike Klonsky’s resolution to the December 1968 SDS council and claims that “although put together by one person, [it] reflects the general thrust as well as potential directions of the new left’s thinking [in Canada]”:

The most important process going on in our society today is the sweeping de-institutionalization of the bourgeois social structure. [...] This molecular movement creates an atmosphere of general lawlessness; a growing personal, day-to-day disobedience, a tendency not to “go along” with the existing system, a seemingly “petty” but nevertheless critical attempt to circumvent restriction in every facet of daily life.

The locus of this process, and the main constituency ascribed to the New Left — the collective actor on whom hopes are pinned — is described in the category of ‘youth.’ The ‘revolutionary youth movement’ is seen as a potential — conceptual and practical — extension of the ‘student movement,’ drawing on what one author terms the “third combat” against “depersonalization in a hyper-rational and overorganized society” and upon the structural position of youth in a drawn-out period of pre-employment. Roussopolous, however, outlines a rejection of the vision of the working class as revolutionary agent stronger than anything in Klosky’s essay of the same title, retrospectively echoing Wallerstein’s (1989) claim that 1968 was “the ideological tomb of the industrial proletariat” in writing that “the young worker becomes radical not by becoming more a worker but by undoing his ‘workerness.’“ Being a worker, then, is an imposed and constraining particularity, but ‘youth’ holds a valorized cachet (explicable, in ambivalent fashion, through the work of Marcel Rioux, discussed in the next section).

Against sterile bureaucratic modernity, but also against tradition, including religion and elements of secular morality, the family structure, and sexual mores, an idealist thrust pervades this point of view (even if Roussopolous suggests in the same article that the counter-culture has “reactionary” tendencies), as well as post-orthodox Marxist view of capitalism in which the middle classes and youth joined the working class and oppressed groups in a loose assemblage of potentially ‘revolutionary’ agents). As Francois Ricard (1992) has argued of the baby-boom generation in general, and in Quebec in particular, there was a manifest desire to dissolve the world and create anew, articulated in generational terms — a kind of messianism, a self-valorizing group identification (particularly in the student milieu), and an idealist inclination to view ‘ideas’ as the terrain of struggle. A valorized aesthetic of the ‘new,’ of the unconstrained and authentically creative, was seen as key to differentiating the ‘New Left’ in this context, and to the hopeful effervescence that so many authors in Our Generation and Noir et Rouge sought to channel and refine into organized and sustained political action.

This notion that ‘ideas’ are a primary field of struggle, and that the fresh ideas of a youthful movement constituency can somehow solve intractable problems is emphasized in both publications. [1]

(note concern with reproduction through education, as well as counter-cultural conceptions of resistance in de Lucy 1970, OG editorial of 1968,)

Invoking the events of May 1968 in France, a kind of ‘organic’ or spontaneous revolutionary process is described:

Magnificently apposite and poetic slogans emerged from the anonymous crowd. Children explained to their elders what the function of education should be. The educators were educated. Within a few days, young people of 20 attained a level of understanding and a political and tactical sense which many who had been in the revolutionary movement for 30 years or more were still sadly lacking (PAGE).

Noir et Rouge marked out a similar ideology in that it chose to focus so intensely on student issues (the CEGEP strike, the state of the provincial student union, etc.) and explicitly called for the student movement to take a leading role in a movement of unions which would bring its forces together with those of labour and...(“La revolte des etudiants” 1969: PAGE). In “Paix, Liberte, Amour,

Fraternite,” (1970), Noir et Rouge editor Francois de Lucy describes the same fundamental questioning of values, notes their violent manifestations in the context of terrorist ‘independantiste’ movements,

The vision of the “revolutionary youth movement” forwarded in these publications, I should note, does not seem to fit with either of the major factions by the same name which emerged out of the split in the SDS in the United States’ SDS; Our Generation and Noir et Rouge solidly rejected both the clandestine activities advocated by the RYN 1 (later Weatherman) and the vanguardist party-building of the Maoist RYN 2 — likely in no small part due to the prevailing analysis of the FLQ strain of the Quebec national-liberation movement, which had presaged the Weatherman strategy of exemplary action in a terrorist vein, intended to spark the population to action, and to an anarchist commitment to decentralization and autonomy which precluded a Marxist-Leninist party strategy. Ultimately putting their faith in a loose coalition of movements, stirred in their radicalism by movement intellectuals such as the contributors to these very journals and swelled by the ranks of the baby-boom generation, the New Left in Canada suffered significantly from a failure to solve organizational and coalition-building problems. Resolved not to take state power (nor to overthrow it by violent means), they took the social movement model of non-violent direct action, independent organization, agitation and the building of parallel structures (including municipalist movements) as far as they could. Sights were set high, consonant with the vision of a world completely dissolved and made anew. As Roussopoulos puts it:

Revolution cannot end with [...] the “seizure of power”; it must culminate in the here and now with the dissolution of power as such.

Drawing on modified Marxist precepts, Universite de Montreal sociologist Marcel Rioux penned an article for Our Generation in 1966, predicting — in concert with the later positions of the editors — that ‘youth’ were in the process of effectively supplanting the working class as the motor of social change in industrialized societies. ‘Youth’ is, for Rioux, characterized by “lag, plasticity, availability, pliability.” These are the characteristics which suit a context requiring flexible actors, a context in which technological change requires constant adaptation, in which permanent education was just emerging as a mainstream idea. The difference Rioux ascribes to the youth of the late 1960s (relative to previous generations of the working class) is that they reject and rally against the bourgeois culture and society “after knowing it and belonging to it.”

Rioux holds that “change is welcome” in (then-) contemporary societies focused ever-more on knowledge production and the provision of services. Drawing a parallel between the ‘social class’ and the ‘social generation,’ he indicates that both are “actual groupings which can either constitute real collective units or contain only the potential for unification, [.which] do not necessarily embody group consciousness.” 1960s protest movements, according to him, was less interested in ‘catching up’ to the economic status of their predecessors or oppressors than in living differently, in making of society something completely new. Of course, in Quebec, this situation was complicated at the time by the question of whether the province (or nation) is primarily an ‘underdeveloped nation’ (for which there were good economic arguments) or ‘an advanced industrial society.’ Rioux concludes that Quebec is both, and that one of its unique aspects is that economically well-placed sectors of its youth (college and university students) perceive the colonial character of their predicament (and are profoundly affected by it) at the same time that they are immersed in a wider North American youth culture tied to the ‘affluent society.’

The relationship between the self-identified New Left in Quebec, associated with the journals Our Generation and Noir et Rouge, always existed in tension with the more radical Quebec nationalists, not because of ambivalent attitudes towards nationalism as such but because of tactical differences concerning non-violence, the efficacy of clandestine and violent exemplary actions. The “sweeping deinstitutionalization of the bourgeois social structure” described hopefully in Our Generation was particularly sweeping in Quebec. Two hundred years of conservative clericalist rule under an essentially colonial economic and cultural oppression combined with a dose of liberalization under the Quiet Revolution to unleash a broad restructuring of legal and normative standards; however, the economic structures remained rigidly capitalist, albeit under a veneer of ‘social consultation’ which pretends at a neo-corporatist consensus. The aversion to centralized organization typical of the New Left organized around Our Generation and Noir et Rouge turned out to be a dead end after a brief spike in radicalized labour actions in the early 1970s, as decentralized organizations foundered amid a polarization on the left between an increasingly liberal-centrist sovereigntist party, the PArti Quebecois, and Marxist-Leninist factions En Lutte and the PCO. Marxist-Leninist parties drew the most radical students, but soon foundered amidst their failure to incorporate other struggles, their support for authoritarian regimes, and rigidly austere and often dogmatic tendencies — not to mention their lack of impact — which fostered both disintegration into rival factions and burnout, dissolving the two organizations around 1980. After the October crisis of 1970 in which the Canadian state imposed martial law and jailed hundreds of nationalist and radical activists and conducted thousands of intrusive warrantless searches, public opinion shifted in an ever more nationalist direction, but one in which the option of political revolution was off the table. Many of the previous student radicals, cowed by the show of force or shifting out of periods of biographical availability, moved on from radical political activity — especially those associated with the counter-cultural movements, as evidenced by the quick disappearance of the Quartier Latin.

As it happens, the anti-nationalist analysis of the writers in Mobilisation and Our Generation who predicted the formation of an endemic bourgeoisie were not far off. The Parti Quebecois, having incorporated radical labour and a wide swathe of the nationalist movement,t won the elections of 1976 (though failing to achieve sovereignty). Ultimately, they continued the Liberal strategy of building up what is referred to as ‘Quebec Inc’ by supporting the development of an ethnic-French capitalist elite, and dashed the hopes of its more radical supporters by invoking the economic crisis of the late 1970s as justification to reign in the unions (who had already lost much of their bargaining power). By the mid-1990s, the PQ came to positions largely indiscernible from their Liberal Party rivals with whom they now alternate power — with the exception of the national question.

The offshoot of all of this is that the radical left in Quebec (especially among anarchists of various stripes) have tended to take a strong anti-nationalist stance, particularly around the 1995 referendum on sovereignty — in contrast to that of 1980 which tended to split opinion. The anarchist press in the intervening years had often displayed its ambivalence, for example in the 1980 referendum issue of La Q-Lotte (a public-sector union-associated paper which emerged in the mid 70s) where contributors resolved simply to allow each to present arguments (some serious, other humourous) for and against. Yet by the next time around, a number of anarchist publications which had popped up in the mid-1990s displayed what continues to be a contemptuous attitude towards a project which had been thoroughly co-opted. Instead, the focus is again on the “here and now” — though common debates rage, as elsewhere, between class-struggle and radical pluralist anarchists, over questions of organization and the question of revolutionary agency. Nonetheless, there have been some recent successes, particularly around a revitalized student movement and work with marginalized communities over police brutality. However, the problem of organization, and how to gain a wide impact through implication in a diverse array of social movements, remains on the table.
