---
title: "Dual power and climate breakdown"
author: "Jack Murray"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-murray-from-stoking-the-embers-collective-dual-power-and-climate-breakdown"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "retrieved on November 16th, 2024 from &lt;libcom.org/article/dual-power-and-climate-breakdown&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jack-murray-from-stoking-the-embers-collective-dual-power-and-climate-breakdown.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-murray-from-stoking-the-embers-collective-dual-power-and-climate-breakdown.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Revolution        Likelihood of state collapse        Dynamic        Moments of crisis        Fascism        The need for ideological leadership and a revolutionary organisation        Alternative        Assembly-based democratic structure        Power        Liberal understanding of change        The nature of the “attitudinal” problem        Confrontation        Commitment        The international dimension        The clock is ticking While this article addresses the “revolutionary” turn in Roger Hallam’s rhetoric , it is more intended as a broader comment on anarchist organisational strategy in the time of climate breakdown. For context, Roger Hallam is the co-founder of the mass climate movement, Extinction Rebellion and the direct action groups Insulate Britain and Just Stop Oil. He is a very influential and problematic figure in the UK climate movement but has recently started to advocate a more revolutionary approach to the ecological struggle. Despite this shift, his politics still seem to be riddled with certain liberal conceptions. This piece aims to separate out the ideas we think are worth echoing, from those that aren’t — in doing so making the case for a “dual power” approach to the crisis that are now coming thick and fast. This article was originally published on The Ecologist We are interested in participating in the conversation about strategy that is ongoing in the broader ecological movement. We are here responding particularly to Roger Hallam views as outlined in the piece ‘XR XL’ published in The Ecologist. In broad terms, we agree with Hallam’s understanding of the scale of horror that is in store for us over the next century. On top of hundreds of thousands of human lives that have already been lost to crises caused by ecological collapse, we expect this century to be characterised by billions more lives ruined or prematurely ended. At this stage, it is beyond question that the blame for both the destruction of the biosphere, and the inability of the majority of the worlds population to respond to it, should be laid at the feet of a social system based on domination and exploitation. Capitalism, imperialism, patriarchy and the state are responsible for our current situation, something he appears to tacitly acknowledge in his calls for ‘revolution’ rather than protest. If by the inevitability of “system collapse”, Hallam means that states will increasingly lose administrative control over their territories, then we also agree with this. Just to confine ourselves to the imperial core — Europe and the United States — as logics of collapse will look/are looking very different in other parts of the world, we think that the following are likely to put a level of strain on state’s administrative capacities that they may not be able to deal with: Shocks to the global economic system (for example, crop failure) Localised natural disaster (for example, in the uk — flooding) The horrifyingly rapid deterioration of the living conditions experienced by the majority of the world’s population (I.e. billions of deaths and billions more forced to leave their homes) Although it extremely difficult to predict these things exactly, its clear that housing crises, food-shortages, energy black-outs, flooding and collapses in key services like healthcare are only a matter of decades or perhaps just years away in places like the UK. When combined, as he says, with the increasing likelihood of war and the move towards more draconian methods of state repression, dissent is likely to spiral, and states, like the UK, may start to lose control of their populations. While we agree in broad-brushstrokes with him on this, we do think that the process will not be as linear as he suggests. For example, we can’t rule out a protracted situation akin to Huxley’s Brave New World, or as depicted in the film Children of Men, in which imperial elites are able to pacify their domestic populations through a combination of ideological contr…
