---
title: "Federation or Death"
author: "Marios Trotsky"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/marios-trotsky-federation-or-death"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "because even if federation did not exist we would have had to invent it"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "marios-trotsky-federation-or-death.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/marios-trotsky-federation-or-death.epub"
    hosted: false
---

This text was written in the electoral period, but remains relevant in an era where the “district fellowships” of the political parties insist on ignoring the 70-80% of Cypriots who voted for federation in the first Sunday of the elections. It is a fact that cannot be questioned, that every time we approach some form of resolution to the Cyprus Dispute, or when (even) some signs of a solution become -as we are accustomed to say- visible in the horizon, all sorts of “fronts” make their appearance, whether they are called “ethnic” or of “national salvation”, their aim is to destroy any hopes of co-understanding and co-habitation in this country. And unfortunately for all of us, they usually succeed. The situation in which we find ourselves today, is unfortunately also their success. All those who wave the banners of nationalism and hate -from both sides- have managed in just two decades to divide the island and to bring us in a situation where a possible war with all the known consequences (of which we know who is affected each time; and of course since 1974), lingers threateningly over our heads. Today, through specific procedures -procedures which we do not necessarily agree with- we again find ourselves in front of the possibility of a coming solution. A solution that is this time based on federation. And as it was more or less expected, a new front of “national salvation” is making its appearance. A front that in fact openly declares that its only goal is blocking the signing of this possible solution. This front, with an admittedly mysterious composition, as it begins from the EDEK and DIKO parties and concludes, through the archbishopric, to ex-members of EOKA B, holds, depending on the case, Enosist fantasies, but above all, fantasies that have to do with the pre-74 situation, when we literally had total Greek Cypriot domination, with the Turkish Cypriots in the role of the supporting actor squeezed in a corner -the enclaves- paying in poverty and misery for the whole situation. This front also has, whether it wants to or not, whether it admits it or not, the love of Denktaş and his clique, as they also -for their own reasons of course- do not want a federation. This is why, by trisecting a hair, they try to convince us with national cries and unfounded arguments that in front of us we do not have a solution based on federation, but one based on co-federation and for this or that reason it will not work, but after all you know we do not want it to work, and after all it would be better to leave things the way they are until we find the opportunity to get the upper hand again and you never know, we may will, everything can happen in this world, in time and in years [this is satirical reference to the hardly translatable Greek nationalist phrase, “πάλι με χρόνια με καιρούς παλι δικια μας θα ναι”, roughly translating to “in time and years they will be ours again”]… For many, even among the supporters of federation, the pre-74 situation, with the island supposedly unified, is a desirable arrangement, that is, an ideal, and if they stand in support for federation, it is because they recognize that a return to that arrangement is now impossible. This approach is completely mistaken. We have to finally understand that there exists on this island another community which wants to; and has the right to live, and that a return to the pre-74 arrangement is not only unattainable but also undesirable and catastrophic, because it would again lead, in a short period of time, to clashes, destruction and death. This is why we have to comprehend, beyond the fantasies of “national completion” and other such nonsense, federation as not a solution out of necessity but as an ideal solution. The faster we understand this, the better. It would of course had been a wishful project if a real federation, in a free society of free individuals, could exist. This would mean the decentralization of power and the self-rule of the different communities (n…
