---
title: "God is dead"
author: "Kurihara Yasushi"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kurihara-yasushi-max-res-god-is-dead"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Commentary on Tooi Koe by Setouchi Jakucho"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kurihara-yasushi-max-res-god-is-dead.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kurihara-yasushi-max-res-god-is-dead.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Walk through reality while dreaming        This book is dangerous        I wish to believe only in absurd things LOVE Jakucho, let’s go! Right now, we’re at the height of the corona pandemic craze. Pan-pa-pan, it’s a pandemic. I actually had plans to visit Jyaku-an and talk with Jakucho-san [1] this April, but of course something came up by chance and it got postponed. I wanna meet up, that’s too bad. Oh, corona. But it’s times like these that call for literature. I wanna stuff myself with love stories. Humans are fearsome things; however relaxed a person is, whenever they turn the TV on and see people praising the government for handing out masks they get pissed off, saying “are you fuckin’ kidding me?” Their eyes are wide open and they’re already cracking. In a state of constantly being online. Saying things need to be like this or things need to be like that, they’re made frantic calling for a better government. Human thought is fixed on being useful to society. Get rid of what isn’t useful? People who don’t restrain themselves are a virus? Crack down on causing trouble for others? That’s how police think, you’re looking with the gaze of a politician. The world is stiff as a board with domination and revolution. But literature changes all that in a second. Drink it once, and you’ll fly over those policing thoughts in a single bound. I guess you could say it feels like falling in love. Of course you read books because you enjoy it, but becoming obsessed with them and wolfing them down isn’t something you plan out consciously, you wouldn’t be able to. Of course it’s not something you do because someone else tells you to either. Even if what’s written there is just impropriety from start to finish, even if it’s not particularly useful to your life, that’s got nothing to do with it. I can’t quit, I’m not stopping. Asking whether it’s useful or not, that kind of thing doesn’t matter anymore. Driven by some kind of unworldly strength, as if you’re dreaming, you’ve fallen for a book. It’s something that happens naturally. Once someone’s obtained that “spontaneous” power, I think that, in a true sense, they’ve escaped the politician’s gaze. They want love. Walk through reality while dreaming. That’s what it is to me. The themes are love and revolution. It’s a critical biography of the Meiji anarchist Kanno Sugako. It was serialized in the magazine Shisou no Kagaku starting in 1968, and published as a book in 1970. Temporally, it was a time when women’s lib was about to give its first cries as it came into the world, even in Japan. Though fundamentally things haven’t changed, it was an age when women speaking sexually was looked upon as taboo, and called licentious. Men were the subject of sex, and women were nothing more than an object to be spoken about. It was master and slave. They believed that, because women were men’s property, they had to protect their virtue and act modest, and the ones that violated that were vulgar and filthy. “Good wife and wise mother” or “whore.” She becomes a machine for giving birth to children or a tool for relieving sexual desires. Seriously? Is she a latrine? Into all of this, Jakucho-san brought Kanno Sugako. While naming herself an essayist, she was uninhibited about sex, and was at times wife, poisonous women, and disrespected female combatant. Using her surging passion as a weapon, she was an anarchist who set her mind to blowing up the emperor, was found out by the authorities and crushed beneath their boots. What was spoken negatively about this woman and the witch-like image she was assigned, Jakucho-san accepted exactly as it was, capturing it and re-framing it into something positive. This isn’t something where she was evaluating her objectively. In some ways she might have overlapped with her. It’s a monologue. Jakucho-san becomes Sugako, sex, sex, and sexual stuff included, expressing clearly everything she’d done up to that point. It’s like a punch to the gut. While we’re at it,…
