---
title: "The future of Syria will be decided by the Syrians and nobody else"
author: "Leila Al Shami"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leila-al-shami-the-future-of-syria-will-be-decided-by-the-syrians-and-nobody-else"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An interview with Leïla al-Shami"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "leila-al-shami-the-future-of-syria-will-be-decided-by-the-syrians-and-nobody-else.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leila-al-shami-the-future-of-syria-will-be-decided-by-the-syrians-and-nobody-else.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Leïla al-Shami and Robin Yassin-Kassab are the authors of Burning Country: Syrians in Revolution and War, an important book in which they recounted the early years of the revolution and the profusion of experiments in popular self-organisation. We interviewed them in 2016 and 2019. The following interview is not an interview in its own right, but rather a sort of addendum to the previous ones. When we interviewed you in 2019, you said that the Syrian people were facing several forms of fascism, that of the regime of course, but also that of certain Islamist rebel groups such as Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTC). Do you think that HTC has changed since then, at least strategically? HTC has changed quite dramatically over the years. It has moved away from its roots in al-Qaeda, which was a transnational jihadist organisation, and transformed itself into a Syrian nationalist Islamist project. Joulani seems to be a pragmatist. He has a lot of experience in building institutions of governance, as he has ruled Idlib since 2017 through the Syrian Salvation Government. The Idlib government was made up of civilian technocrats appointed by the shura council, rather than democratically elected, and included no women in leadership positions. They were responsible for providing services, distributing humanitarian aid in coordination with international organisations and ensuring security. They did this under very difficult conditions, and Idlib and its economy were more stable than elsewhere in Syria, so they enjoyed some popular support. But they remained an autocratic and authoritarian force. While people had more freedoms in Idlib than in the regime-controlled areas, over the years we have seen continuous protests in Idlib against the HTS regime, due to the silencing of opponents, the imprisonment of critics and reports of abuses in prisons. Since the overthrow of Assad, Jolani has clearly been trying to build popular and international legitimacy. He has reached out to minority communities (both religious minorities and Kurds) to reassure them of their future in the country. He has issued decrees banning any interference with women’s dress. Many Syrians feel reassured by these measures, but many are also cautious. We must not forget that this is a transitional government. The question now is to what extent other players, including progressive and democratic forces, will be involved in Syria’s future. And to what extent will another popular movement emerge from below to hold the leaders to account and continue to make progress towards the original objectives of the revolution? How do you explain the sudden fall of the Assad regime? Some see it as the victory of an armed and organised militia supported by Turkey and having taken advantage of the weakening of Hezbollah. Others see it as the continuation and reactivation of the revolutionary process and stress the importance of local and popular uprisings in this victory. Are we witnessing a change of regime or a decisive stage in a longer revolutionary process? I see it as both. The fall of the regime was a decisive event. It marks the end of a horrible era of brutality in Syria’s history. It also offers a tremendous opportunity to re-launch civil activism and may lead to the continuation of the revolutionary process. Today, Syrians are flocking from all over the world to return to Syria. Many of these revolutionaries have never given up on their dreams and have also learned a great deal from their experience of organising in exile and their contact with different political cultures. Already, many initiatives are taking shape, and there are now opportunities and hope, which Syrians have not had for many years, despite the many challenges we still have to overcome. A few years ago, you wrote an important text, L’anti-impérialisme des imbéciles (The anti-imperialism of fools), in which you denounced the failure of a certain Left that stubbornly refused to understand anything about the Syrian revolut…
