---
title: "For Max"
author: "Antti Rautiainen"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/antti-rautiainen-for-max"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 18th July 2024 from avtonom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "antti-rautiainen-for-max.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/antti-rautiainen-for-max.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A 13 year term as a reward for activism        Living according to your own principles        Against borders        From Bob Marley to the support of partisan Sinchenko A veteran of the anarchist and anti-fascist movement of Ukraine, Maxim Butkevich, has been a prisoner of war of the Russian army for two years. Anarchists could write more about him, and my text about him also comes late, but there is little that can be done to help him. After Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, Max, who had the rank of reserve lieutenant, volunteered for the Ukrainian Armed Forces. He participated in the liberation of the Kiev region from the occupiers , but in June 2022 he was captured in Eastern Ukraine. He was surrounded, and, deciding to surrender, saved the life of his company. Propaganda videos about prisoners of war soon appeared, and he was noticed in them. Filming such videos in itself is a war crime, but his family and friends could rejoice that he had not been shot or starved to death in imprisonment. In the spring of 2023, Max was sentenced to 13 years in the so called ”Luhansk Peoples Republic” under the articles of “cruel treatment of civilians” , “the use of prohibited methods during an armed conflict”, as well as “attempted murder.” During the trial, he was not even able to have a lawyer of his choice; the first time a lawyer was able to communicate with him was on the day of the appeal hearing, the 22 nd of August 2023, via video link from Moscow. Max is innocent: the crimes allegedly occurred in Severodonetsk, but his unit arrived there only 10 days after the stated date. Max initially admitted his guilt, and it’s clear why — there is no reason to participate in this circus where the outcome is predetermined. His term is a kind of reward from the Russian regime for human rights activities over the past 20 years. The absurdity of the accusation was obvious to both Oleg Orlov from Memorial and Svetlana Gannushkina from Civic Assistance, perhaps the two most well-known living human rights fighters in Russia. Both of whom know Max well and came to the appeal hearing, where they were able to talk to him via video link for the first time (and the penultimate time) since his arrest, during a break in the session. The last (for now) opportunity to see Max was during the consideration during the consideration of the appeal in the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on Wednesday, the 13 th March 2024. This time the jailers no longer allowed Max to communicate with the public except through gestures, but Max was cheerful and smiling. Svetlana Gannushkina came, but Oleg Orlov is now serving a prison sentence of 2.5 years, because he told the truth about the war in Ukraine. This time Max denied any guilt, saying that he admitted it because of torture, and because in exchange for his confession he was promised a quick inclusion in the prisoner exchange (they lied, of course). The Supreme Court, naturally, did not care about all this; the verdict was upheld. Because of Max’s fame and connections throughout the world, there is no shortage of people willing to finance his lawyers, but lawyers are actually prevented from communicating with him. Letters and parcels were returned for a long time with the Stalinist trademark note “correspondence is not allowed”. Only in the spring of 2024, almost 2 years after his arrest, he began to receive some letters, but they are currently once again not being allowed through. We can only hope for an exchange of prisoners, but since Max is hated by the Kremlin, and was not friends with the Ukrainian authorities either, I’m afraid he will not appear on the exchange lists any time soon. Numerous texts about what a wonderful person Max is will most likely not reach him, and do nothing to particularly help him. But, I hope, there will be no harm from them either, therefore, I am writing. I heard second-hand that Max even quite recently considered himself an anarchist, though I a…
