---
title: "Anarchism and Religion"
author: "Lara Apps, Alexandre Christoyannopoulos"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexandre-christoyannopoulos-lara-apps-anarchism-and-religion"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This is a revised version of A. Christoyannopoulos and L. Apps, ‘Anarchism and Religion’, in N. Jun (Ed), A Companion to Anarchist Philosophy (Leiden: Brill, 2018); A. Christoyannopoulos, ‘Religious Studies and Anarchism’, in C. Levy and S. Newman (Eds), The Anarchist Imagination: Anarchism Encounte"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexandre-christoyannopoulos-lara-apps-anarchism-and-religion.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexandre-christoyannopoulos-lara-apps-anarchism-and-religion.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Introduction        Anarchist Critiques of Religion        Anarchist Exegesis        Anarchist Theology        Religious Anarchist History        Conclusions Anarchism is nearly always anticlerical and frequently atheistic, yet the intersection of religion and anarchism is more complex than is often assumed. Indeed this intersection has proved a fertile ground for a variety of analyses, especially in recent years. The interactions between religion and anarchism vary: sometimes anarchists are making or revisiting claims about religion; sometimes religious scholars are articulating a theology which engages with anarchism; sometimes the focus is on how specific anarchists approached religion; and sometimes religious scriptures are interpreted to point to anarchist politics. In other words, the encounter between religious studies and anarchism can concentrate on very different facets of either, and involves very different approaches and methodologies, very different modes and tones of enquiry. The aim of this chapter is to map out the intersections of religion and anarchism by considering four main types: classic anarchist quarrels with religion and its institutions; anarchist interpretations of founding religious scriptures and figures; anarchist ‘theology’ as distinct from scriptural exegesis; and historical studies on specific religious anarchist thinkers, communities and movements. The intersection of religious studies and anarchism has proved a fertile ground for a variety of analyses in recent years. [1] Students and practitioners of religion have taken anarchism more seriously, and students and practitioners of anarchism have taken religion more seriously. The encounter can lead to tensions and expose unbridgeable differences, but in most cases explorations have been fruitful, opening up and investigating new avenues of thought and practice. This dialogue encompasses a variety of rather different conversations: sometimes anarchists revisit their assessment of religion; sometimes religious scholars articulate a theology which engages with anarchist tropes; sometimes the focus is on how specific anarchists approach religion; sometimes general parallels are drawn between anarchism and religion; sometimes religious scriptures are interpreted to point to anarchist politics; and so on. In other words, the encounter between religion and anarchism can concentrate on very different facets of either, and involve different approaches, methodologies, modes and tones of enquiry. This variety reflects not only the different themes of interest to both anarchism and religion but also different ontological, epistemological and methodological approaches. This chapter sketches out some of the ways in which anarchism and religion intersect and influence each other’s imagination. The aim is not to systematically present all the scholarship in this area, although an effort has been made to encompass a broad range of sources to compile an accurate map of the different types of scholarship around this topic. As often with typologies, the divisions and categories proposed might at times be rather arbitrary. They should not, therefore, be interpreted too strictly but rather heuristically, as an attempt to catalogue the territory. The chapter is structured in four sections: the first considers some classic anarchist quarrels with religion and its institutions; the second surveys the scholarship on anarchist interpretations of founding religious scriptures and figures; the third discusses the growing interest in anarchist ‘theology’ as distinct from scriptural exegesis; and the fourth points to the variety of historical studies on specific religious anarchist thinkers, communities and movements. It will quickly become obvious that the dominant religion in the scholarship is Christianity. One reason for this might be that (at least according to the traditional narrative) anarchist thought and practice cut many of its teeth in soc…
