---
title: "Always Against The Tanks"
author: "Darya Rustamova, Mike Harmon"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-always-against-the-tanks"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Three Essays on Red Nationalism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-always-against-the-tanks.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-always-against-the-tanks.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction      Everything you ever wanted to know about tankies, but were afraid to ask        What does tankie mean?        Are all Tankies Marxist-Leninists?        Are all Marxist-Leninists tankies?        Are all Leninist Marxists Marxist-Leninists?        Were the Black Panthers tankies?        And the League of Revolutionary Black Workers?        What about anti-imperialism?        Didn’t the USSR support African national liberation?        Isn’t criticising the USSR anti-communist?        What about Syria, Iran, North Korea?        But Communist parties are very successful in India/Japan?        What about American Marxist Leninists, are they social democrats too?        Liberals just call anyone they don’t like a tankie!        Should I work with Marxist-Leninists?      Ending the Idealization of the Other: Notes on the Queer POC Tankie        1. So what is a tankie?        2. Post-9/11, queer liberalism as forerunner        3. Something new        4. The Imperial Academy        5. About Socialist People        6. But why queer? Why POC?        Works Cited      Is Genocide Denial Anti-Imperialist Now? How Tankies are Taking Over Leftbook and the London Student Scene        A history which no longer matters, apparently        A present that matters less This zine was compiled with the goal of making accessible a critique of “tankism,” a reactionary ideological position that seems to be trending on the Left. Much like the alt-right, which in 2015 appeared to be an internet phenomenon with little potential to gain a foothold in the streets, tankies have fared well in the era of ascendant nationalisms. In North America they are making the jump from Twitter to our offline communities. Those of us who believe in a world of radically expanded freedom and the end of domination must contend with the zombified corpse of the 20 th Century’s authoritarian Left. In “Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Tankies, But Were Afraid to Ask,” Mike Harman uncovers the history of the term “tankie” and its relationship to various strains of Marxism-Leninism. Then “Ending the Idealization of the Other” draws on Su-lin Yu’s critique of Orientalism to explain why some queer people of color in North America support repression when it is committed by “socialist states.” Finally, in “Is Genocide Denial Anti-Imperialist Now?” Darya Rustamova confronts the fetishization of the USSR while expounding on the harm caused by those denying or minimizing genocide and war crimes. By Mike Harman, @libcomorg March 8 th , 2018 On October 27 th 1956, Peter Fryer, a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain, and correspondent for its paper the Weekly Worker, arrived in Hungary. This was four days into an uprising of workers calling for worker controlled socialism. Factories had been taken over nationally by workers councils, in a demonstration of workers self-organisation that was unprecedented at the time, and the first strike on its scale in an Eastern-bloc country. On the 4 th of November, Russian T54 tanks rolled into Budapest to suppress the uprising. Street fighting continued until the 10 th November, although the workers councils held out for two months. Fryer returned to the UK horrified by the Soviet repression he had seen, but his attempt to write about it for the Daily Worker was suppressed — the editors were sticking to the official USSR line that the entire uprising was a fascist counter-revolutionary plot and refused to publish anything contradicting that narrative. When Fryer wrote up his experiences anyway, he was expelled from the CPGB. Hungary 1956 split Communist parties across the world; many who had supported the USSR up until this point became disillusioned and split or left individually, while those who stayed loyal to the USSR earned the epithet ‘tankies’. After 1956, the USSR was to invade Czechoslovakia in 1968, then Afghanistan in 1979. While the original ‘tankie’ epithet grew out of the split in the Communist Party …
