---
title: "Ashanti Alston on the Black Panthers and the Zapatistas | Black Anarchism"
author: "Ashanti Omowali Alston"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ashanti-alston-ashanti-alston-on-the-black-panthers-and-the-zapatistas-black-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;youtube.com/watch?v=kYQ8N6sit2E&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ashanti-alston-ashanti-alston-on-the-black-panthers-and-the-zapatistas-black-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ashanti-alston-ashanti-alston-on-the-black-panthers-and-the-zapatistas-black-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Ashanti’s involvement with the Black Panthers        The Black Liberation Army        Prison Reading        The Zapatista Uprising Ashanti: First thing, first thing, first thing... Power to the people. Audience: silence Ashanti: Oh! Wait a minute... First thing, first thing, first thing... Power to the people. Audience: Power to the people! Ashanti: Oh my God, I'm like, whoa... And what we usually say when someone says power to the people, the response is; all power to the people! Alright, so I give you the first one. Yeah, I mean, that's OK, 'cause I was practiced, right? But all power means that all power goes to the people, right? Didn't say to the party. Didn't say to the state. It didn't say to the slick talkers. Not other ones. To the people, to the people, to the people, right? So for me it's like, that's very anarchistic, you know, to the people, right? Power to the people! Audience: All power to the people! Ashanti: Right on. That's pretty good, that's pretty good. ... What I'm going to try to do tonight is talk about our experience in Chiapas. This was last year though, so this wasn't, this was all before the 6th declarations, and a lot of the things that's going on with the 6th Declaration I am still trying to understand. I have not formulated any analysis, any positions. I am just open to what's going on there and especially hearing people's interpretations when they go and come back or the things that I can find on the Internet. I'm trying to understand, but this is still, for me, one of the most exciting struggles that have been going on probably since [the] Spanish Civil War, early days of the Chinese revolution, early days of maybe even the Cuban and some of the African liberation movements and other third world liberation movements. This is exciting stuff happening here, and it's why it's exciting to me [is] that [it] brings in my past in terms of the Black Panther Party. So I think it's important because we're still engaged in this project here of making revolution in the United States and I smile when I say revolution 'cause I love the word revolution. I just learned to change big 'R' Revolution to small 'r' revolution, and I'll probably get into some of that today, because for me that's a big step, coming from a time period where revolution meant that there was a particular way that you had to think, organize, fight, with a particular plan that led to a particular goal that would look like a particular thing. Whether we call this socialism, communism, whatever, you know, and to go through so many changes in my own lifetime to being open, to learning, to come to the conclusion like the Zapatistas that there are no "plans", there are no final plans. There is no big 'R' revolution, there have never really been one that has succeeded. But small 'r' revolution means that the small people get to make this revolution happen. They bring in their creativity. They bring in their diversity coming from different places in life different experiences, different knowledge bases means that no one can come and say, well, I got it all, you just got to follow me, you just got to follow our organization, you just got to see our vision. So for me this is abbatis if revolution becomes like what we could have done in the 60s at our height, is what the Zapatistas I see doing now, right their vision, their style of working with people, how they draw from their own cultures, how they're open to pulling knowledge, information from other areas of the world and all of this stuff they they do. So, I look at the things we did in the Panther Party and said, man, I wish we could have done this, I wish we could have done that. Maybe we wouldn't have these laws. Coming from a small black town in New Jersey, Plainfield, NJ. Uhm, black power was what pushed a lot of US young people to more radical positions before that civil rights movement held sway. And it was all about integrating into the empire. A lot of us are learning from Malcol…
