---
title: "Egoism Vol. I. No. 1."
author: "William S. Bell, Victor Yarros, James L. Walker, Henry Replogle, Georgia Replogle"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-i-no-1"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved 02/19/2023 from catalog.hathitrust.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-i-no-1.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-i-no-1.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Pointers.      The Name and Purpose of Egoism.      The Hour and the Need.      Business Announcement.      The Egoistic Philosophy.        I      Selfishness versus Altruism.      The Fiction of Natural Rights.      Mrs. Grundy’s Kingdom.      The Reasons Why.      The Ethics of Property in Wives.      Egographs. Duty is, and ever has been, the cross of human spontaneity. Enlightenment makes selfishness useful, and this usefulness popular. Men and women not having learned those things which others know, naturally think they know all that is known; and therefore persist in the inconsistencies which this knowledge would remove. If men applaud your self-sacrifice, it is because that sacrifice benefits them, and so little is their interest in you that they will not give you even the kicking you desire when you realize your stupidity. Improve every opportunity for pleasure. Even though that pleasure consists of the least pain, it is a bargain compared with anything worse, which is the only thing that could be except something better. “The Reasons Why,” on seventh page, by Victor Yarros, reprinted from “Liberty,” is his contribution to this paper on that subject. It was placed so far back because of the lateness of advice regarding its printing. We gladly avail ourselves of its clear-cut and condensed exposition of Egoism. Surprises continue not to cease! Here comes the Denver “Individualist,”—our first X—under the new management, a plumb-liner and an Egoist. It now has the clear ring, and challenges EGOISM’s deepest appreciation. To support it, will reflect great credit on the radicals of the country. “Fair Play,” of April 26 th , in its hearty announcement of EGOISM’s coming, reaches the conclusion that its publishers could not produce the ring it discovered without outside help. If “Fair Play’s” editors have detected any real ring in our announcement of the new paper it refers to, the facts are against their conclusion, for the announcement was written by its publishers. “The Hour and the Need,” on the third page, is the first of a series of articles which will appear in this paper from that able writer, Victor Yarros. Those who read attentively his exposure of authoritarian schemes of reform, will acquire that which will be of great service to them in the coming contest between the primitive impulse of authoritarianism and the evolved expediency of freedom. We have been exceedingly fortunate in being favored with the promise of a series of articles on the central idea of this journal, the first of which appears on the fourth page, “The Egoistic Philosophy,” by Tak Kak. All who wish to become acquainted with this universally misunderstood and, all-important thought, will in this series get it from undoubtedly the ablest exponent of the subject on this continent, if not as able as any one who has ever written on it. “The Economics of Anarchy; a Study of the Industrial Type,” is Dyer D. Lum’s latest work. This is a very valuable addition to industrial literature, being a complete and concise statement of the economics of Anarchy. Mr. Lum’s attractive style of writing makes clear even the most abstruse subjects. It will greatly aid the progress of economic thought for this book to have a wide circulation, as it will help to overcome the prejudices against the treatment of economics from an anarchistic standpoint, and be of benefit to those who are studying in that line of thought. We will give it further notice in our next number, as it reached us late for this one. The pamphlet contains 59 pages, and considering the thought-matter is cheap at 25 cents. It can be obtained from Dyer D. Lum, 196 Washington street, Chicago, Ill. The “Rag Picker of Paris,” by Felix Pyat, translated from the French by Benjamin R. Tucker, will be concluded in the next number of “Liberty” (Boston). This novel is the most complete portrayal of human nature in every condition of life, that has been contributed to radical literature. Every line, every p…
