---
title: "About Anarchism"
author: "Nicolas Walter"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nicolas-walter-about-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "100th issue of Anarchy, (Vol 9 No 6) June 1969. Retrieved on 2020-09-30 from https://libcom.org/library/anarchy-100"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nicolas-walter-about-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nicolas-walter-about-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     What Anarchists Believe        Liberalism and socialism        Democracy and representation        State and class        Organisation and bureaucracy        Property        God and church        War and violence        The individual aud society      How Anarchists Differ        Philosophic anarchism        Individualism, egoism, libertarianism        Mutualism and federalism        Collectivism, communism, syndicalism        Not so different      What Anarchists Want        The free individual        The free society        Work        Necessities and luxuries        The welfare society        Pluralism        Revolution or reform      What Anarchists Do        Organisation and propaganda        Action The modern anarchist movement is now a hundred years old, counting from when the Bakuninists entered the First International, and in this country there has been a continuous anarchist movement for ninety years (the Freedom Press has been going since 1886). Such a past is a source of strength, but it is also a source of weakness—especially in the printed word. The anarchist literature of the past weighs heavily on the present, and makes it hard for us to produce a new literature for the future. And yet, though the works of our predecessors are numerous, most of them are out of print, and the rest are mostly out of date; moreover, the great majority of anarchist works published in English have been translations from other languages. This means there is little that we can call our own. What follows is an attempt to add to it by making a fresh statement of anarchism. It is addressed in particular to readers in Britain at the end of the 1960s—a place and a time in which there is a considerable revival of interest in anarchism as a basis not for sectarian argument about the past but for practical discussion about the future. Such a statement is necessarily an individual view, for one of the essential features of anarchism is that it relies on individual judgement; but it is intended to take account of the general views prevailing in the anarchist movement and to interpret them without prejudice. It is expressed in simple language and without constant reference to other writers or to past events, so that it can be understood without difficulty and without any previous knowledge. But it is derived from what other people have said in the past, and does not purport to be original. Nor is it meant to be definitive; there is far more to say about anarchism than can be fitted into thirty-two pages, and this summary will no doubt soon be superseded like nearly all those that have preceded it. Above all, I make no claim to authority, for another essential feature of anarchism is that it rejects the authority of any spokesman. If my readers have no criticism to make, I have failed. What follows is simply a personal account of anarchism drawn from the experience of fifteen years’ reading anarchist literature and discussing anarchist ideas, and of ten years’ taking part in anarchist activities and writing in the anarchist press. May 1969 The first anarchists were people in the English and French revolutions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who were given the name as an insult to suggest that they wanted anarchy in the sense of chaos or confusion. But from the 1840s anarchists were people who accepted the name as a sign to show that they wanted anarchy in the sense of absence of government. The Greek word anarkhia, like the English word “anarchy”, has both meanings; people who are not anarchists take them to come to the same thing, but anarchists insist on keeping them apart. For more than a century, anarchists have been people who believe not only that absence of government need not mean chaos and confusion, but that a society without government will actually be better than the sociey we live in now. Anarchism is the political elaboration of the psychological reaction against authority which appears in all human groups. Everyone…
