---
title: "Anarchy explained to children"
author: "José Antonio Emmanuel"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-emmanuel-anarchy-explained-to-children"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "To the children of the Spanish proletariat"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jose-antonio-emmanuel-anarchy-explained-to-children.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-emmanuel-anarchy-explained-to-children.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1. What is Anarchy?        2. How do you reach Anarchy?          The School          The Union          The Cultural Athenæum        3. How do we become worthy of Anarchy? “Weak and small, children are, for this very reason, sacred.” — Élisée Reclus This leaflet was written to answer a question that various comrades have formulated: How will I educate my children? This is a question which we had been expecting and will answer according to what Reason and Science dictate. Dedicated to the children of the Spanish proletariat, we hope that these pages –modestly written– will direct the education of our youth in a truly renewing manner. We address ourselves to parents and teachers so that, at home and school, they spread the healthy doctrines of an education where all fanaticism is banished. We aspire to free youth from the heinous oppression to which it is being subjected. Due to faults from one side or the other, education has remained stuck in a paralysis of servitude, out of which it must emerge redeemed and relieved. Let these brief pages be an incentive for everyone. Anarchy, dear children, is the doctrine that does not conform to the organizational model which has been imposed on humanity since the time when Society was being formed, and it tries to give a foundation to life based on the sacred principles of universal love and human solidarity. Its mission is to abolish the ruling inequity between beings, which divides them into rich and poor, exploited and exploiter, slaves and masters. That life be just what it should be: the free manifestation of its faculties, spontaneity of its actions, an ultimate liberation that destroys the causes inhibiting society from being based on full liberty and the most absolute independence. Among the causes which Anarchy aims to destroy, as it considers them harmful and detrimental to the free development of the individual and the collectivity, I can list the following, so that you never forget: while resisting them we work for the wellbeing of all of us. Militarism is the armed force which the ones who have attained power over life use to impose their injustices and strengthen their wickedness. This force does not retreat even in the face of crime; it supplies individuals with arms, against others, it throws them against those who, like you, like your parents and your siblings, have turned toil into virtue. When we rebel against this way of action, when we rise against the injustice that is used against us, they fall upon us. Not happy with wanting to destroy us, they start wars, they tithe humanity, and the crimes pile up on the road we travel. Anarchy opposes Peace to this brute force. The anarchist does not want war, he opposes war and yearns for peace, because that is a fundamental point of his saviour doctrine. He considers all human beings, he does not want boundaries that separate us, only hearts that are founded in one love: the total and absolute emancipation of human beings. Anarchy’s arms are the book, the work, the word. With these it combats the organized force of militarism and with them he shall triumph over butchers and man devourers. With the book, the work, the word, it calls everyone, making them see that the force of ideas stands above brute force, and that its final triumph cannot be discussed. Clericalism is the farce with which the usurpers of life have surrounded themselves to demonstrate that their impositions, their tyrannies, their oppressions are just and agreeable to a “god” they have forged to cover their actions with kindness. With this “god” they address the hearts of the faithful , surrounding him with uncommon pageantry and luxury in the temples they have erected for him, they direct orations and prayers to make everyone believe they are the directors of life, the organizers of life, and that society sins when it does not follow this god, the mandates of this god, the tyrannical orders of this god. Above all, he will have the power over you, dear c…
