---
title: "Buddhist Anarchism: Theory and Practice"
author: "Mx. Flow"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mx-flow-buddhist-anarchism-theory-and-practice"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Vision for a Buddhist Anarchism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mx-flow-buddhist-anarchism-theory-and-practice.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mx-flow-buddhist-anarchism-theory-and-practice.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Anarchist Monastic Order        Modern Hierarchy        Monastic Lay Divide        Practice        The Way is Rough “Is it possible to exercise rulership righteously: without killing and without instigating others to kill, without confiscating and without instigating others to confiscate, without sorrowing and without causing sorrow?” -The Buddha, SN 4.20 [1] Buddhist Anarchism is a synthesis of Anarchism from Buddhist Religion. Buddhism is a religion over 2,500 years old that teaches people to free themselves from Dukkha (suffering, stress, unsatisfactoriness) through practicing Sila, Samadhi and Panya (Virtue, Concentration and Wisdom) and achieving nibbana (enlightenment, freedom from dukkha). Anarchism is a political philosophy in favor of egalitarian and mutual relationships between people and opposed to hierarchy, domination and authority. Anarchism asserts a world where everyone has control over that which directly affects them. Anarchism includes concepts of free association (federation as a process of forming egalitarian associations without coercion of government), mutual aid, and direct action. While Buddhism teaches compassion, individual responsibility and community interdependence. Buddhist Anarchism is an Anarchism that is derived from Buddhism; Anarchism flows down from the application of Buddhist thought to questions of authority, domination and social organization. In considering how a state functions we find that the fundamental requirements of a state or government rely on breaking the most basic precepts (training rules) of Buddhism. The five precepts are considered the most basic rules for both monastic and lay people to follow. They are: Not to kill Not to steal (take what is not given) Not to commit sexual misconduct (cheating, abuse, etc.) Not to lie Not to use intoxicants (alcohol, etc.) Nonviolence is a basic tenant of Buddhism that the Buddha was unambiguous with. The Buddha asserts non-retaliation is a practice that is difficult and often unpopular and if you are serious about ending suffering, one must commit to nonviolence [2] . The only leeway being the small room given when someone strikes a blow “desiring freedom” (such as being grabbed by a kidnapping police officer). This exception does not include the violence committed by the military or police nor does it allow killing under the guise of self-defense. The state and capitalism ultimately require a monopoly of force to be held by the state and its enforcers (police, military). If that violence is never a possibility (as in well practiced nonviolence) then the state and capitalism can not reasonably function. Private property cannot be enforced in the absence of violence. Police are not police and soldiers are not soldiers if they are disallowed from violence. What would stop us from sharing everything if there were no Pinkertons, police departments or military to enforce private property? The precept against not taking what is not given comes to encompass the largest forms of theft today: theft of surplus labor value, private property and wages. Whenever a worker does not fully receive the value of their labor, the capitalist effectively steals that surplus value. When a boss withholds duly owed wages and tips for themselves, they steal the wages of the workers. Private property is an institution that seeks to legitimize the theft of formerly collective or free land by utilizing violence to kill, injure or imprison anyone who attempts to use what was once free for all [3] . Private property enables exploitation and creates an inherently oppressive dynamic between those who own property and those who are permitted to use it. If we seek to renounce oppression, we must also renounce theft and in doing so renounce private property. The state and corporations rely upon lying and deceit. From corporate spying and advertising to government espionage and propaganda. A state must constantly reassert its own authority in de…
