---
title: "1945"
author: "Alfonso Martínez Rizo"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfonso-martinez-rizo-1945"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The advent of libertarian communism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alfonso-martinez-rizo-1945.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfonso-martinez-rizo-1945.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Brief introduction      Chapter 1: In the year 1945      Chapter 2: Historical summary      Chapter 3: My person in 1945      Chapter 4: The last infamy of capitalism      Chapter 5: The conspiracy      Chapter 6: The abolition of money      Chapter 7: The proclamation      Chapter 8: Generality of motion      Chapter 9: The public force      Chapter 10: A pleasant encounter      Chapter 11: How we discharged the army      Chapter 12: Two Phrygians      Chapter 13: A desnudist      Chapter 14: A sunset on Las Ramblas      Chapter 15: Eight days later      Chapter 16: Libidinous      Chapter 17: The Bloodthirsty Beasts      Chapter 18: The days keep passing      Chapter 19: A crime      Chapter 20: On the way to Madrid      Chapter 21: Libertarian Communism of the Village      Chapter 22: My prison      Chapter 23: In the chapel      Chapter 24: Running back time      Chapter 25: Writing this book I think that before starting the novel I should give the reader a brief explanation of certain points, because I fear that if I do not make things clear from the beginning, I will be unpleasant from the beginning of the book. The aim is to perform an educational function that allows us to understand, with a novelistic plot, the possibility of the libertarian communist regime and how the civilized life of humanity will develop under it. The author therefore needs to use his imagination to be able to present a plastic picture of the new order of things that we anarcho-syndicalists aspire to without the tricks of explanation, transporting the reader to glorious future times. But, in trying to depict the advent of libertarian communism before it was consolidated and in a normal state, he has been forced to set a specific date for the triumph of the social revolution. This is precisely the point I need to clarify because, assuming that these events will happen in 1945, that is, thirteen years from now, I fear that the countless impatient and hopeful deluded people will find that I have set a date that is halfway distant and think that I am too lukewarm in my desires for the triumph of our ideals. That is why I want to briefly discuss here the many things that we still have to do before we can safely say that we are ready to implement the new regime without hesitation. It may be that the impatient are right and that the social revolution will take place much sooner than I imagined. But in that case it will not be that we make the revolution, but that the bourgeoisie will clumsily deliver it to us and that we will be forced to take power and take charge of the administration without being properly prepared for it. In order to be really capable of having the unions take control of production and distribution by establishing the libertarian communist regime, it is first of all absolutely essential that we do away with not the differences of ideology and tactics, but the hatred that such differences cause in certain cases. As long as we are not governed by the imperatives of love and camaraderie, we will be incapable of any fruitful action. We took a decisive step towards training by agreeing to organize by industries, but it is not enough to agree on it, we must also comply with the agreement. We are moving very slowly, although it is evident that it is very difficult to move more quickly given the difficulties arising from the incessant persecutions we are suffering. Can the reader imagine a date on which all the corresponding bodies of this organization would function? But after such an organization has been established, the workshop committees, factory councils and industrial federations will need some time to master the levers they will have in their hands, and then even more time to establish statistics that will allow us to know how much is produced and consumed, how much can be produced and how much will need to be consumed under the new regime, as well as the stock of each product in each locality at any given time. Only after all…
