---
title: "Confronting Cops and Klan in Stone Mountain"
author: "CrimethInc."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-confronting-cops-and-klan-in-stone-mountain"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 3rd December 2020 from crimethinc.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "crimethinc-confronting-cops-and-klan-in-stone-mountain.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-confronting-cops-and-klan-in-stone-mountain.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Background: Against Police and White Supremacy in Atlanta, 2011–2015        August 2011: Troy Davis        September-December 2011: Occupy Atlanta        March 2012: Trayvon Martin        August 2012: Troy Davis Anniversary        July 2013: Zimmerman Verdict        April 2013: Edgewood Courts        Fall-Winter 2014: Ferguson Solidarity        November 25, 2014: Non-indictment of Darren Wilson        Winter 2015: Eric Garner, Nicholas Thomas, Anthony Hill        May Day 2015: Freddie Gray        April 23, 2016: Stone Mountain Park, Georgia        Entering the Park        Internal Conflicts        Going Off the Map        Afterwards On April 23, 2016, hundreds of people gathered to oppose a rally called by the Ku Klux Klan at Stone Mountain Park, Georgia. This convergence brought together a wide range of groups committed to shutting down the KKK. The crowd circumvented several blockades consisting of hundreds of local officers, riot police, and state SWAT teams to reach the parking lot where the white supremacists were assembling. This was just one of many events in the wave of black-led revolt since the eruption in Ferguson, Missouri in August 2014 following the murder of Mike Brown. To understand the context of what happened in Stone Mountain, we have to pan back across the struggles of the preceding years. In this report, we recount the demonstrations that led up to this one and offer a blow-by-blow account of the action for everyone who may have to mobilize in response to similar rallies in the years to come. In fall 2011, Troy Anthony Davis was executed by the State of Georgia for allegedly killing a police officer in 1989. In the week preceding his execution, thousands of people took the streets of Atlanta and the parking lot outside of Jackson Prison, where the execution was to take place. While Amnesty International and other non-profit organizations held protests during the day, autonomous groups coordinated multiple breakaway marches and an overnight occupation of the plaza of the GA Board of Pardon and Paroles. This was one of the first signs of confrontational protest Atlanta had seen in years. While the Occupy movement was camped out downtown, metro Atlanta police killed many black people and at least one white person. When an officer murdered Joetavius Stafford on his way home from prom, Occupy protesters and others marched through downtown, flooding a train station and chanting anti-police slogans. When Dwight Person was shot to death in his East Point living room, angry Occupy protesters, recently evicted by riot police, marched through downtown again. When Ariston Waiters was shot in the back while handcuffed in Union City, a predominantly white black bloc joined black youth in painting graffiti and smashing the windows of the Justice Center. After George Zimmerman murdered Trayvon Martin in Sanford, Florida, thousands of people rallied at the state capitol. Mostly black university students and churches led chants and prayers for several hours, casting dubious glances at the predominantly white masked demonstrators who later joined others in a breakaway march of perhaps 100. The march vandalized nearly a dozen police cruisers, stomping in windshields and smashing windows with no arrests. No news station reported the vandalism. On the one-year anniversary of the execution of Troy Davis, around 100 demonstrators marched through downtown chanting anti-police slogans. Immediately after the verdict of “not guilty” in the Zimmerman trial, a crowd marched downtown. Masked demonstrators and unmasked young black participants began vandalizing construction equipment and painting graffiti. Other black and white activists physically obstructed this behavior. The next day, thousands marched with the Trayvon Martin Organizing Committee from West End to downtown via a highway. Black professionals, activists, and clergy physically assaulted white people in the masked contingent and collaborated with police to attempt t…
