---
title: "Before The Storm"
author: "Buenaventura Durruti"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/buenaventura-durruti-before-the-storm"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Letter sent by Durruti from Valencia prison to the Model Prison in Barcelona where his comrade Mira was an inmate.Reprinted in Solidaridad Obrera, November 1990, No 213 https://web.archive.org/web/20060525063006/http://flag.blackened.net/revolt/spain/durruti_prison.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "buenaventura-durruti-before-the-storm.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/buenaventura-durruti-before-the-storm.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In Valencia's Model Prison where Durruti had been an inmate since that August, CNT and FAI prisoners drawn from Catalonia, Aragon, and Levante proper were in the majority. This homogeneity among the prisoners ensured that the internal affairs of the CNT and the FAI were the especial focus of their discussions. Two years on from the split with the CNT and now that the controversy surrounding it had become less impassioned, the notion of a return to the bosom of the CNT, as advocated by J. Pedro and J. Lopez, was beginning to make some headway; precisely how this return to the fold was to be negotiated, no-one yet knew. All such issues and points were passionately debated in the cells and on the landings of the Model Prison. Durruti who was more preoccupied with other matters spent his time in prison keeping somewhat aloof from these debates and to judge by one letter written at about this time one might say that he was at daggers drawn with the committees of the CNT. The letter in question is dated 11.9.35 and was addressed to J. Mira, and was by way of a reply to a letter from Mira. The document he refers to in the course of the letter is one where he outlines his position with regard to the current actions of the CNT. In "Durruti: the people armed" by Abel Paz, Free Life Editions, 1977, this position is summed up as follows- "ammunition shouldn't be wasted uselessly; it was necessary first to put the finishing touches on a social revolutionary organisation, economizing scarce resources for the struggle. The militant cadres who were free, should not expose themselves, nor weaken the movement with useless strikes" [extracts from Durruti's document] The letter begins like this: "Got your letter to which I am now going to reply - naturally!- especially as it has to do with matters of some interest to me. From this end I have no news to bring you, except that two comrades were released yesterday. We hope that these releases will continue and that soon we shall all be out. First of all, let me make this prefatory comment: what any comrades imprisoned with you may think of me matters very little to me. I am true to myself, adhering to the course that I marked out for myself some time ago. If by chance you have followed my record as an anarchist and revolutionary through the press or in conversations with comrades you will have noticed that the mentality of the vulgar hold-up man or gunman is no part of my make-up. I came to the ideas and continue to profess them because I believed, and still do, that the anarchist ideal is above all pettiness and base resentments. I have always thought, and think still, that the struggles enjoined by the Confederation in defence of one more peseta and one hour less were skirmishing that the organisation needed, but never advances towards confederal and anarchist goals. The Confederation has well-defined principles: it aims directly at transforming the capitalist system so as to introduce libertarian communism. But for a revolution of this sort, Mira my friend, one needs anarchist ideas and a revolutionary education rather than the education of a hoodlum: much less believe that the CNT should squander all of its vitality on one or two conflicts so that those concerned may have a scrap more cod on the Sunday dinner table. The CNT which is the most powerful organisation in Spain must take up its rightful place in the collective order. Its battles must be in tune with its greatness. It would be laughable to find a lion in the middle of the jungle squatting for hours on end at the entrance to a rat hole, waiting for some little rat to emerge so that he might gobble it up. The CNT is in the same position at the moment. There are those who argue that the organisation's fight in Barcelona represents a manly, revolutionary stance. I, Mira my friend, think the contrary. Sabotage anybody can indulge in, even the faintest of hearts. On the other hand, it takes men of courage to make a revolution, whether on the…
