---
title: "Anarchist Critique of Radical Democracy"
author: "Markus Lundström"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/markus-lundstrom-anarchist-critique-of-radical-democracy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Impossible Argument"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "markus-lundstrom-anarchist-critique-of-radical-democracy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/markus-lundstrom-anarchist-critique-of-radical-democracy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Preface      CHAPTER 1. The Search for Radical Democracy      CHAPTER 2. Democratic Conflict        Husby’s Democratic Life        Intensified Conflict        Threat to Democracy      CHAPTER 3. Democracy and Anarchy        Anarchist Critique          Against Authority          Against Representation          Against Majority Rule        Anarchist Reclamation          Direct Democracy          Toward Anarchy        Reclaimed Critique          Democracy and Non-Human Life          Anarchy and Radical Democracy          The Impossible Argument      CHAPTER 4. The Impossible Argument to Radical Democracy      References to the ungovernable My drive for writing this book comes from personal encounters with democratic, state violence. Though comparably mild, these experiences awoke in me an urge to understand, to study, the very nature of domination, hierarchy, and conflict. That voyage took me deep into the political tradition that struggles for no less than to make every form of domination impossible. While studying the sundry history of anarchist thought, I soon began to notice vivid, ungovernable weeds of resistance, growing even in the most democratic of environments. When listening to the people of Husby, a Stockholm city district, located at Sweden’s socio-political periphery, I glimpsed the depths of that compound, collective experience. And by reading radical-democratic theorists, not least Jacques Rancière, I found tools to identify here a certain conflict—a democratic conflict. In this book I look at that precise social antagonism: the trenchant division between government and those it tries to govern. The first chapter begins on this personal note, before soon introducing radical-democratic theory and its ideas on democracy’s conflictual nature. The following empirical chapter brings that theoretical endeavor to Husby through ethnographic interviews documenting the so-called Husby Riots. In the Swedish spring of 2013, “The Husby Riots” came to embody a local-historical antagonism, a deep conflict between the people of Husby and their alleged governors. The Husby events expose a democratic conflict, and in this book we travel farther into the very historical tradition that is emblematically concerned with that governors–governed divide, namely anarchism. From a probing interrogation of anarchist thought, the third chapter sketches a divergent and discontinuous relation between democracy and anarchy. The concluding chapter puts these findings into dialogue with Husby’s democratic conflict, offering to radical-democratic theory The Impossible Argument: a compound anarchist critique of radical democracy. In addressing a seemingly ever-topical social conflict, that between the governors and governed, this book has obviously been inspired by uncountable people across time and space. Yet some have specifically contributed to its making. First of all, the empirical inquiry into the realm of democratic conflict is greatly indebted to the experiential analyses shared by the people of Husby. Being hospitable to question-asking scholars, in times of intense police and media presence, is no easy thing; yet without the clear-headed courage of those Husby residents who were interviewed, this book would not have been written. Here I also want to acknowledge the ad hoc research team that set out to document community-informed narratives on the Husby events. Apart from inviting me to participate in a most educative field study, enabling the empirical backbone for this book, I am very much indebted to the persistent, encouraging close readings of the following research collaborators; Paulina de los Reyes, Magnus Hörnqvist, Marcus Lauri, Alejandro Gonzalez, Kristina Boréus, Janne Flyghed, and Felipe Estrada. By this same token, I must also express my sincere gratitude to the unfailing input from Jonas Lundström, always rigorous, knowledgeable, and never disheartened. Furthermore, Daniel Berg has contributed to the manuscript with enor…
