---
title: "Cybernetics & Entheogenics"
author: "Hakim Bey"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-cybernetics-entheogenics-from-cyberspace-to-neurospace"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Cyberspace to Neurospace"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-lamborn-wilson-cybernetics-entheogenics-from-cyberspace-to-neurospace.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-cybernetics-entheogenics-from-cyberspace-to-neurospace.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The term “Neurospace” I learned from the Kiev artist Vladimir Muzehesky, through Geert Lovink. What I immediately thought he meant by it was a comparison of that space which is posited as belonging to the computer with the neural space or the inner-body experience, that comes, for most of us, largely through psychedelic drugs—neurospace as the space of hallucinations, for example. I would like to compare and contrast, as they used to say in school, cyberspace and neurospace. There are similarities and differences. I remember some years ago, when virtual reality suddenly appeared with a big whizbang on the scene, going to a conference in New York where Timothy Leary, God bless him, appeared with Jaron Lanier and couple of other cybernauts. Tim was wearing the goggles, he was on stage and he said, “Oooh, I have been here before.” So right from the start there was this connection set up between virtual reality and the LSD experience—or as some us prefer to call it “the entheogenic experience,” which is just a fancy way of not using the word psychedelic because it alerts the police. Actually, “entheogenic” means the birth of the “Divine Within.” I am able to use this term that is meaningful for me even though I am not a theist in the strict sense of the word. I don’t think you have to believe in God to understand that there can be an experience of the Divine Becoming Within. In fact historically—and, at least for me, experientially and existentially—that has been the most important aspect of the reappearance of psychedelic drugs in my lifetime. I am almost an exact contemporary of LSD: I was born in 1945, and Albert Hofmann was already cooking up various preliminary versions. Last summer I got to meet Hofmann, and he is a wonderful advertisement for the psychedelic experience. He is well over 80, and he is hale and hearty—got all his brain cells and is still working, eats like a horse, drinks like a fish. This is my lifetime we are talking about. There is a historical question, in the history of religions per se, and that is: Where do psychedelics come from? Terence McKenna believes that human consciousness itself is a function of the psychedelic experience, specifically of the psilocybin mushroom. He believes that one day an ape took a shroom and became a human, because cognition appeared. Terence says that what makes us human is the psychedelic experience. I don’t know if I literally believe this; in any case, I don’t believe in any single origin for human consciousness. But it’s enlightening to think about the possibility that we may owe our difference from the other members of the simian clan to our ability to experience psychedelics in a certain way. If that were the case, it would be true that our entire experience of cognition—which historically belongs in the category of what is known as “religion”—would have begun with psychedelics. The entire psychedelic experience would be co-existent in time with human becoming. An interesting hypothesis; we can add it to all theories of human origins. I like to think of palimpsests. In the Middle Ages they didn’t have much paper, so they would write one way on the paper and then would write another way on the same paper. Sometimes they would even write a third way. They were used to reading it this way. My approach to theory is a palimpsestic one: I like to pile up theories one on top of another and hold up the whole stack up to the light and see if still any light is coming through. Think of it as animation gels, but with writing in a stack. Add all those theories, one on top of each other. The positive way of looking at consciousness is that is “us.” The bad aspect of it is that consciousness itself would seem to be a separation process. Georges Bataille spoke about this in an interesting way: he hypothesized that all religion concerns a memory trace of a time in which the human was separate from nature—from the animal, let’s say. And if you believe in evolution, this is just litera…
