---
title: "Christian anarchism"
author: "Sebastian Kalicha"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sebastian-kalicha-christian-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on January 28, 2025 from https://www.anarchismus.at/religionskritik/christliche-religionen/7760-sebastian-kalicha-christlicher-anarchismus"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sebastian-kalicha-christian-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sebastian-kalicha-christian-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Class struggle, anti-fascism and the peace movement        Libertarian Catholics        Criticism of the church        Labor movement        Jesus as a Social Rebel        The Kingdom of God A succinct characterization of Christian anarchism could be as follows: Christianity is understood in a way that ultimately amounts to something in political and social questions that political activists in the labor movement of the late 19th century began to call "anarchism" or "libertarian socialism." It is an anarchism that derives from the Bible and the life and work of Jesus. The Bible and the message of Jesus thus serve as a basis for arriving at similar or the same conclusions as those formulated by anarchist theorists: to regard the state with all its institutions and representatives as illegitimate, to reject capitalism as an economic system, and to implement an egalitarian, decentralized and non-violent social order, free from oppression and exploitation, in its place. The French sociologist and philosopher Jacques Ellul, who has contributed a lot to Christian anarchist theory, writes in this sense that "biblical thought leads directly to anarchism." But a particular exegesis of the Bible does not necessarily have to be the focus or serve as the sole starting point for a libertarian understanding of Christianity. For example, for the Catholic Worker movement - which is one of the best-known examples of how even Catholic Christians can relate positively to anarchism - it was always clear, in addition to a libertarian understanding of the Bible, that they were drawing on numerous different political and philosophical ideas and currents of the left, the combination and fusion of which ultimately gave rise to this new movement that was ultimately called "Christian-anarchist". One of the founders of the Catholic Worker movement, Peter Maurin, for example, was strongly influenced by three schools of thought, namely the French personalists (Emmanuel Mounier, Jacques Maritain), the Russian anarchists (Peter Kropotkin, Leo Tolstoy) and the English distributists (Eric Gill, G. K. Chesterton, Hilaire Belloc). The traces left by the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) union, of which the influential Catholic Workers Dorothy Day and Ammon Hennacy were members, in the actions and political priorities of the Catholic Worker movement are also evident. If one takes a closer look at the Catholic Workers' understanding of anarchism, the picture is again one that requires differentiation and specification. The Catholic Workers are influenced neither by "Stimer's extreme individualism" nor by "Bakunin's belief in the creative and redemptive power of violence and destruction", but very much by "the pacifist anarchism of Tolstoy, the communist anarchism of Kropotkin and [...] by the mutualism of Proudhon". The claim here is not that anarchism and Christianity are essentially the same. The historical and intellectual roots of Christianity and anarchism are different, but this does not have to stand in the way of an anarchist understanding of Christianity. Some authors argue that Christian anarchism is not about "bringing two systems of thought together," but is simply "an attempt to put the message of the gospel into practice." Ciaron O'Reilly, also an activist in the Catholic Worker movement, aptly says that "the premise of anarchism is inherent in Christianity and the message of the gospel." We will try to find out exactly how this manifests itself. First, however, we will discuss the relationship between anarchism and Christianity and take a more differentiated look at it. In the anarchist movement, anti-clerical or anti-religious beliefs have a strong and long tradition. You can look at any anarchist classic from the late 19th or early 20th century; statements against church and religion are almost always missing, which is why a negative attitude towards religion is often seen as an anarchist "essential". Let's take one of the best known an…
