---
title: "Collage"
author: "negligible forces"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/negligible-forces-collage"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Basic Proposition for a Meta-Anarchist Political Vision"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "negligible-forces-collage.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/negligible-forces-collage.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Fragmentation as an alternative to consensus        Virtual polities and the Collage        Alterprise and forks of freedom        Metaanarchy is a panarchy, but not every panarchy is metaanarchy        Meta-X. Baseline protocol for the Collage Consensus is when people reach a mutual agreement on a given issue. Anarchy loves consensus. Actually, some anarchists seem to believe that it’s the only acceptable form of decision-making. Unfortunately, consensus has its limitations. The capacity for consensus drops rapidly as the size of the group increases; it usually takes a lot of time to reach one; not everyone are fans of participating in sophisticated and lengthy discussions on every single issue. Those are all usual objections to anarchism — and arguments for top-down governments. That is, states. States rely on the principle of one-for-all decisions. They claim it as an inevitable consequence of large-scale organization — because it’s not like an actual consensus can be reached between millions of people, right? But you don’t need a consensus for millions of people. Sometimes, though arguably so, there is an actual necessity to enact a decision that has to be shared by a group of people this large. Perhaps, some kind of an issue of planetary scale — akin to climate change. However, this happens drastically less often than the state strives to present. There are far less groups that actually require a commonly shared decision. The state operates in this manner not because of some “natural necessity” , and not because it has the best interests of society in mind, but to impose a type of governance that is more convenient for the state itself. Unified systems are far more compatible with centralized governance. Being used to this approach to decision-making as the “natural” one, some of us may unconsciously transfer it onto our ideas of a freer society. That’s kinda what happened to “representative democracy”: all residents of the country are obliged to express the enormous aggregate of its collective will through the bottleneck of a single ruler, a single set of rules, a single voting act. Although some things have changed, the structure of governance remained similar to that of a monarchy. No wonder this kind of democracy appears hardly functional to some people. If convenience for society (rather than convenience for top-down governments) is a priority for us, another type of decision-making comes to the forefront. “Fragmentation” . What’s that? It’s a type of decision-making which implies that different people should be able to enact different decisions regarding how they want to live — and how they want to organize their habitat. It also implies that their coexistence can be coordinated within prescriptions of mutually shared protocols. The principle of fragmentation is highly prominent in the open-source software industry — known there as “forking” . But can we apply it to political organization? Let’s look at examples. Residents of a neighborhood disagree on whether a road must be built in the place of a local garden. To resolve this dispute, one could use conflict resolution techniques, reconcile both sides and achieve consensus on the basis of a compromise. One could also find new, nontrivial solutions which would satisfy everyone. If there are no resources for such luxury — perhaps, act in accordance with the opinion of the majority. But no matter what type of method we apply here, this would still remain a one-for-all solution. In this particular case, technologies of our time leave us with no alternative approaches to this problem. So, here fragmentation is inapplicable . Here’s another example. Residents of a town believe that publicly smoking weed is harmful to everyone in that town. Residents of another town believe that publicly smoking weed is harmless, and maybe even beneficial to the smokers. Now, you can fragment the decisions at the regional level. Weed-haters can prohibit smoking in their town, and w…
