---
title: "Defining Anarchism"
author: "Jason Justice"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jason-justice-defining-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on January 1, 2005 from www.cat.org.au"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jason-justice-defining-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jason-justice-defining-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Anarchism has been defined many ways by many different sources. The word “anarchism” is taken from the word “anarchy” which is drawn from dual sources in the Greek language. It is made up of the Greek words αν (meaning: absence of [and pronounced “an”] and αρχη (meaning: authority or government [and pronounced “arkhe”]). Today, dictionary definitions still define anarchism as the absence of government. These modern dictionary definitions of anarchism are based on the writings and actions of anarchists of history and present. Anarchists understand, as do historians of anarchism and good dictionaries and encyclopedias, that the word anarchism represents a positive theory. Exterior sources, however, such as the media, will frequently misuse the word anarchism and, thus, breed misunderstanding. A leading modern dictionary, Webster’s Third International Dictionary , defines anarchism briefly but accurately as, “a political theory opposed to all forms of government and governmental restraint and advocating voluntary cooperation and free association of individuals and groups in order to satisfy their needs.” Other dictionaries describe anarchism with similar definitions. The Britannica-Webster dictionary defines the word anarchism as, “a political theory that holds all government authority to be unnecessary and undesirable and advocates a society based on voluntary cooperation of individuals and groups.” Shorter dictionaries, such as the New Webster Handy College Dictionary , define anarchism as, “the political doctrine that all governments should be abolished.” These similar dictionary definitions of anarchism reflect the evolution of the theory of anarchism made possible by anarchist intellectuals and movements. As a result, dictionary definitions, although fair, only reflect watered down definitions of the word “anarchism”. Professor Noam Chomsky, in fact, has refuted the definition, as written in the New American Webster Handy College Dictionary , describing anarchism as a “political doctrine.” According to Chomsky, “...anarchism isn’t a doctrine. It’s at most a historical tendency, a tendency of thought and action, which has many different ways of developing and progressing and which, I would think, will continue as a permanent strand of human history.” Other modern definitions of anarchism are thoroughly explained, not as a word, but as a history of movements, people and ideas. The Encyclopedia of the American Left , in fact, gives a three page history of anarchism, yet does not once define the word. Prior to the existence of the word anarchism people used the term “Libertarian Socialism,” which meant the same thing as anarchism. “Libertarian socialism” was used largely by Mexican radicals in the early eighteenth century. William Godwin was the first proclaimed anarchist in history and the first to write about anarchism. He was born in 1756 in Weisbech, the capital of North Cambridgeshire. He later married feminist Mary Wollstonecraft and had a daughter, Mary Shelley — author of Frankenstein . Godwin published a book called Political Justice in 1793 which first introduced his ideas about anarchism, Godwin was forgotten about, however, and after his death Pierre Joseph Proudhon became a leading anarchist figure in the world. His book What is Property? incorporated greater meaning to the word anarchism; anarchism became not only a rejection of established authority but a theory opposing ownership of land and property as well. Anarchism fully blossomed as a defined theory when Russian anarchists Mikhail Bakunin (1814–1876) and Peter Kropotkin (1842–1921 started to write and speak. Bakunin had a major influence in the world and introduced anarchism to many people. Kropotkin was one of the many people inspired by Bakunin. Kropotkin wrote many books on anarchism, including Mutual Aid , Fields, Factories and Workshops , and The Conquest of Bread , and greatly aided in the evolution of the theory of anarchism. Kropotkin wrote the first…
