---
title: "Dispersed Fordism and a New Organisation of Labour"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-dispersed-fordism-and-a-new-organisation-of-labour"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translation from Here &amp; Now 13, Glasgow, Autumn 1992 From Anarchy is Order CD"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-dispersed-fordism-and-a-new-organisation-of-labour.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-dispersed-fordism-and-a-new-organisation-of-labour.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     DISPERSED FORDISM AND A NEW ORGANISATION OF LABOUR.        TOWARDS A NEW TYPE OF STRUGGLE.        THE VULNERABILITY OF THE PRODUCTIVE PROCESS IN DISPERSED FORDISM.        JIT & ZERO INVENTORY: THE LOGISTICAL CHAIN OF ADDED VALUE        THE OBJECTIVE LIMIT OF CAPITAL IS SUPPRESSED SUBJECTIVITY UNDER THE FORM OF LABOUR POWER.        THE MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES & THE IDEOLOGY OF THE FIRM        THE NEW CYCLE OF STRUGGLES OF DISPERSED FORDISM.        THE UNSTABLE DIS-AGGREGATION        THE REPRESSIVE UNIFICATION OF THE WORLD UNDER THE SWAY OF CAPITAL The following is a transaction of a text from the June ’91 edition of the Spanish magazine Etcetera based loosely around the Spanish truck drivers’ strike of October 1990. It could equally apply to the French truckers’ strike of July ’92. The occasion doesn’t matter too much as basically the text deals with the re-organising of production in the 80s. How a highly efficient managerial offensive is equally highly vulnerable to a sectorally limited action which due to the new totalitarian invasion of capital cannot have much visionary edge but could prove to be one of the decisively destructive components of the new upsurge from below we are beginning to see all around the world. (not from translators:BM Blob). From the 10 th to the 20 th October 1990 the road haulage industry in Spain, which according to sources in the Confederation of Spanish Industry carries 75% of goods in transit became the scene of some of the most violent conflicts in recent years because of a strike call by the self employed unions. Basically the strike could be cited as a typical conflict of interest between large and small haulage firms. That is, a confrontation between the large firms who control the majority of the long distance transport market and small proprietors (owning from one to five lorries). As a conflict of interest between two fractions of capital the platform of demands by the unions calling the strike which according to the press represented upto 15% of the sector — it led to a series of requests relating to the defence of an operational niche within the profitable transport market. This required the intervention of the government against “illegal” lorry drivers for example, and other aspects relating to the fixing of rates, inspection, pensions etc. In other words from the point of view of the forces at work, the lorry drivers’ strike does not justify the interest granted to it in these pages. As has become habitual in the latest conflicts in Spain, the strike unfolded within a strict corporatist sphere, although it was capable of generating a very tense atmosphere (confrontation with the police, attacks on scabs and the blocking of entrances and exits on the main roads and motorways). But its real significance was not to be found here. As the media recognised in its haste to discredit the strike, only a minority of lorry drivers obeyed the strike call and that not in all areas. Nevertheless one must recognise the extraordinary impact of the strike action. Within a few days of drivers having drawn their lorries across motorways and mounted pickets the disruption to supplies to the large towns became evident, to the point where shelves were emptied in supermarkets (Bilbao, Catalunya) and some products became scarce (fish amongst them) in the Madrid and Barcelona markets. But the consequences to the industrial sector were of much greater magnitude. Although the Confederation of Spanish Industry and the larger bosses organisations tended to exaggerate the losses (they mentioned figures which oscillated between 50,000 million pesetas and 200.000) the fact is the threat of total closure hung over the industrial belts of the principal regions (Madrid, Zarragoza, Barcelona, Guipuzcoa). By way of example — General Motors closed down, Firestone, Nissan and Seat halted their assembly lines as did Citroen. many other firms suffered interruptions to the productive process like Fasa, Renault, Mic…
