---
title: "Contract Feudalism: Reply to a Reply"
author: "Kevin Carson"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-contract-feudalism-reply-to-a-reply"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published in the 2008 issue of Economic Notes No. 105 by the Libertarian Alliance. Retrieved 07/20/2022 from c4ss.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-carson-contract-feudalism-reply-to-a-reply.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-contract-feudalism-reply-to-a-reply.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Contract Feudalism Restated        Libertarianism and Scarcity        Time Preference and Capital        The Historical Record in Fact and Fiction        Legitimate and Illegitimate Ownership        Excuses, excuses The Libertarian Alliance was kind enough, in 2006, to publish my pamphlet Contract Feudalism: A Critique of Employer Power over Employees . [1] Since then, Paul Marks, a Conservative councillor on Kettering Borough Council, has taken the trouble to reply to it with a pamphlet of his own: A Critique of a Critique: An Examination of Kevin Carson’s Contract Feudalism . [2] As grateful as I am for the attention, I hesitate to undertake a response. Mr. Marks’ effort has been lionized in the libertarian blogosphere. For example, Stephan Kinsella of Mises Blog calls it “a brilliant, solid, and interesting analysis” of my pamphlet, [3] and Perry De Havilland of Samizdata praises Mr.. Marks for being “in splendid and splenic form.” [4] One of the commenters at Samizdata dismisses me as a “yapping Pomeranian” in comparison to Mr. Marks’ “English mastiff.” Nevertheless, even though I take my life into my own hands in confronting this formidable mastiff, I feel I owe him some sort of response as a matter of courtesy. Toward the beginning of his critique (I say toward the beginning because it’s the first substantive comment following a rambling dissertation on assorted topics like the semiotics of the Voluntary Cooperation Movement emblem), he asks just what “contract feudalism” is supposed to mean (followed by another rambling tangent on the historical meaning of the term “feudalism”.) Contract feudalism,” put simply, refers to the persistence of superior-subordinate relations reminiscent in substance to those under previous regimes of status, but under the guise of a de jure regime of contract. Lysander Spooner put it pretty well in Natural Law : “In process of time, the robber, or slaveholding, class – who had seized all the lands, and held all the means of creating wealth – began to discover that the easiest mode of managing their slaves, and making them profitable, was not for each slaveholder to hold his specified number of slaves, as he had done before, and as he would hold so many cattle, but to give them so much liberty as would throw upon themselves (the slaves) the responsibility of their own subsistence, and yet compel them to sell their labor to the land-holding class – their former owners – for just what the latter might choose to give them. Of course, these liberated slaves, as some have erroneously called them, having no lands, or other property, and no means of obtaining an independent subsistence, had no alternative – to save themselves from starvation – but to sell their labor to the landholders, in exchange only for the coarsest necessaries of life; not always for so much even as that. These liberated slaves, as they were called, were now scarcely less slaves than they were before. Their means of subsistence were perhaps even more precarious than when each had his own owner, who had an interest to preserve his life. They were liable, at the caprice or interest of the landholders, to be thrown out of home, employment, and the opportunity of even earning a subsistence by their labor”. [5] Although Spooner’s primary focus was on agricultural wage labor, rather than the industrial and service kinds that predominate in our economy, the basic principle of labor’s dependency when it has been separated from the means of production and subsistence is essentially the same. A worker who is utterly dependent on employment, in a market where those in search of employment outnumber the available openings, is dependent on the whims of an employer for his food and shelter. The greater his dependence, the greater the degree of his subjection to his employer’s whims, both on and off the job. At one point in his critique, Mr. Marks sums up my article in these words (p. 4): “Some employers even demand that their employee…
