---
title: "Elements of Resistance: Violence, Nonviolence, and the State"
author: "Jeriah Bowser"
date: "2015"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeriah-bowser-elements-of-resistance-violence-nonviolence-and-the-state"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: ""
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jeriah-bowser-elements-of-resistance-violence-nonviolence-and-the-state.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeriah-bowser-elements-of-resistance-violence-nonviolence-and-the-state.epub"
    hosted: false
---

         Acknowledgements          Introduction        Chapter 1: A Common Language, A Common Goal          Lexicon        Chapter 2: Business As Usual        Chapter 3: Nihilism and Resistance        Chapter 4: Understanding the Other          Critiques of nonviolence          Privilege          State Complicity          Historical Narratives          Critiques of Violence          Pacifism and Active Nonviolence          Ends vs. Means          Pandora’s Box        Chapter 5: A Peoples History of Violence        Chapter 6: Warriors of Peace          Gandhi          Mandela          King          The Narrative        Chapter 7: The Path          Stage One: Colonization          Stage Two: Decolonization          Stage Three: Active Nonviolence          The Fourth Stage: Total Liberation          The Traps          The Fearful Warrior          The Lackey          The Privileged Pacifist        Chapter 8: Case Studies          Stage One Case Study: The Puerto Rican Independence Movement          Stage Two Case Study: The Paris Commune          Stage Three Case Study: The Zapatistas        Chapter 9: My Journey        Chapter 10: Elements of Resistance This book is anti-copyrighted. Any and all parts may be republished, reappropriated, taken out of context, desecrated, defiled, or whatever else you feel like doing with it with no intellectual property rights held by the author whatsoever, because intellectual property is a stupid idea, anyways. To Mark Seis, thanks for the computer, and for believing in me. As an independent autodidactic scholar and writer, it is an especially nerve-wracking experience to write and publish a book, as I don’t have many standards to measure myself against other than my own limited, self-directed experience, and I am constantly looking to others to provide feedback and outside perspective on my academic work and theory. Thus, this book would not be possible without a host of people who have guided me and helped with this project. Even with all the help I’ve received, I am sure that there are angles I overlooked and stories I missed. Any errors in the research and historical data are mine own, as I am still relatively young and inexperienced as a writer and researcher. I make no claims to any academic standards except my own quest for truth and beauty in this strange and sick world of ours. Any feedback on my work is greatly appreciated; I always welcome critiques and intelligent discourse. As to the cast of characters who helped me out with this project, first and foremost I must thank Mark Seis, to whom this book is dedicated, for letting me to audit his classes, for taking interest in me, for believing in my ability to write and encouraging me to put my thoughts down on paper, for giving me the computer with which I typed this book, and for providing invaluable advice, encouragement, and feedback to me along the way. Angie, thanks for supporting me in numerous ways, for helping me throughout numerous edits and revisions, and for patiently listening to my endless verbal processing sessions while I worked through these ideas. I would also like to thank Colin Jenkins and the rest of the Hampton team for taking a chance on me and supporting me through my first year of being a writer, as I cut my teeth on awkward articles and gradually found my place as a writer and author. I probably wouldn’t be writing today if the Hampton team hadn’t taken me under their wing. Many thanks to all of my friends who have edited the numerous drafts of the book and given me insightful feedback - Mark, Colin, Ben, Stephen, Jordan, Johanna, Marea, Aaron, Willie, and Mick. Thanks to Dylan and your project Evergreen Refuge, for your hauntingly beautiful music which provided the soundtrack for this book. One of these days I’ll actually buy your albums rather than just streaming them through bandcamp. Although published through the Hampton Institute, I dedicate this manuscript to the public domain and retain no intellectual p…
