---
title: "About the double robbery in Velvento, Kozani (Greece)"
author: "Nikos Romanos, Dimitris Politis Andreas, Dimitris Bourzoukos, Giannis Mihailidis"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nikos-romanos-dimitris-politis-andreas-dimitris-bourzoukos-giannis-mihailidis-about-the-double"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=13363&gt; &amp; &lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=13426&gt;. Retrieved on 19/07/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nikos-romanos-dimitris-politis-andreas-dimitris-bourzoukos-giannis-mihailidis-about-the-double.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nikos-romanos-dimitris-politis-andreas-dimitris-bourzoukos-giannis-mihailidis-about-the-double.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Our days pass, our nights do not.        Text by anarchist Nikos Romanos concerning his connection with the CCF We run for our escape, while around us a regular manhunt is developing. Behind us a predefined life, carved by the hands of the dominants, aiming at internalizing our subjection as an objective condition, legalize ethical systems of laws and rules, equalize the individual with a statistic logic of numbers. Ahead of us the world of our “utopian” fantasies which is conquered only with violence. One life, one possibility and decisive choices. Look at the between the clouds and jump, because the fall has never been a more assured choice. On Friday 01.02.13, together with a group of comrades, we proceeded to a double robbery of the Agrotiki bank and the Post Office in Velvendo, Kozani. Our opinion is that there is some substance In analysing to an extent the operational part of the robbery. Mainly to show all the sides of the attack, the choices we took, the mistakes we made and the reason which led to those: So, Friday morning, we attacked the two targets divided into two groups. Our plan from the start was to take the money from both safes, which we did. During our escape a series of unfortunate events and wrong handling of the situation, led to the revelation of our vehicle, as well as our direction to the police. Due to the police cordon, the comrade who was driving the van which was externally disguised as an ambulance, was seeking for escape routes for the group that carried out the robbery. In his attempt, he made the mistake of passing by a cop car three times, resulting in him being considered a suspect. A car chase followed and then, because he ended up in an unknown area to him, he reached four dead ends at the last of which he was surrounded, effectively erasing any chance of escape. Thus, after burning the van he was arrested. With all these developments and while our comrade who had the escape vehicle was already in the hands of the cops, our choices of escape were narrowed down drastically. We decided, therefore, to stop the first oncoming vehicle, since it would secure a more safe escape for us and our comrades. The main matter in this condition was to ensure our comrades new escape vehicle would not become known to the cops, so we decided to keep the driver of the car with us, until we found an escape route for us too. Its approximately at this point that we encountered a cop car which gradually led to a wild car chase until the city of Veria at which point most of the areas police forces were behind us. Obviously we never considered even for a second to use our hostage as a human shield (we would not have had a problem if for example he was a bank manager), anyway the police did not know about him. In the end he became a human shield for the cops unbeknownst to them, because he was the reason we did not use our weapons to disengage. Because our conscience and our morals did not allow us to risk the life of a person who ended up with us against his own will. At this point we want to clarify something, that we did not carry the weapons in order to intimidate anyone, but as a tool in case we clash with the cops. So, the reason we did not act as we should have, in order to escape, was a condition we were in due to our wrong handling of the situation. The only way of escape now was speed and our attempt to gain distance with our vehicle from the cops who were chasing us. However, the city of Veria is not the best place for something like that and thus we soon got stuck in a narrow street resulting in our arrests. During our arrest, the only thing we stated from the start was that the person who was with us in the car had nothing to do with the robberies and with us. Nevertheless the cops continued beating him too, at least for as long as we had eye contact with him. The above narration is not in the frames of showing off and self-presentation, but in order to reverse the legacy of the arrests without a…
