---
title: "empathy and the education system!!"
author: "DELINQUENTS"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/delinquents-empathy-and-the-education-system"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 26 October 2023 from delinquents.noblogs.org/post/2023/01/03/empathyandtheeducationsystem"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "delinquents-empathy-and-the-education-system.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/delinquents-empathy-and-the-education-system.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       YOU DON’T HAVE TO WRITE THE BEST POEM IN THE WORLD I have a resentful, painful relationship with school. I am constantly repressing the feeling, one that I know intimately but don’t know how to hold. I am in my first semester of university, and these large feelings are brimming inside of me. I want my feelings to have a home, or a voice. I will preface all of this by saying that I will discuss school in the first person (saying “I,” “me,” “my”) so as to not generalize or speak for others. I also don’t want to minimize the pain that accompanies school for so many people as if it is a solitary experience. My experience with school is influenced by my struggles with severe OCD, depression, and suicidality. I feel a crushing isolation within academic settings. I long to have a place among my peers– and within the world– while being acutely aware of my discomfort in academia. Over the years, I have come to reject the competitive nature of school. It has been a long time since I have seen meaning in grades or AP scores. I have rejected the “survival of the fittest” tenet that is deeply rooted within the education system. I have tried to make school my own. I have reinvented what school could look like for me so many times. Despite all of this, I haven’t felt any more at home within the school system. When I sat in my high school classes, I felt this visceral sense of shame and self-criticism. I didn’t feel like I had worth when my teachers spoke to me, as we did our assignments, as I sat in those spaces. When I am alone, I have so much love for myself and know how much I have to offer. In a classroom, much of that falls away, and I am left with the person who I do not recognize but a feeling I recognize so well. The contrast is devastating, between what I feel and what is expected of me, between what I try so hard to trust is possible– the light within me, my visions of community– and what school makes seem possible. For so much of high school, I looked forward to college. I would have more freedom. I would finally be in classes that made me feel excited and inspired. Class wouldn’t feel like class , but rather a space for personal endeavors that were tied to what I’m passionate about. As I am here, I tell myself that I am supposed to like higher education. I’m supposed to want to be in classes and like being called a scholar and feel inspired by academia. There is a seed within me, growing, calling out to me. It helps me tend to my anger at this place, at the classroom, at what school continues to be for me. When I wake up in the morning, I know so deeply that I don’t want to get up and go to class. I sit in class and feel hollow, which is upsetting because when I am outside of class, I never feel more alive. My everyday, constant struggle with severe OCD can be further complicated within a system that is largely organized around what others think is right for me. I am so tired of apologizing for being human. Forgive me For when I’ve been in despair and haven’t been able to turn in homework on time For when I didn’t come to class because I couldn’t sleep that night For when my medication has caused pain in my head, spine, and esophagus, so I couldn’t look at a bright projector screen without crying Image description: Email from a teacher that says “Missing Homework: You have fallen significantly behind in your homework and are now failing economics. ALL these back homework assignments are due on Wednesday including the Study Sheet for the exam (also on Wednesday). Please see me tomorrow to discuss.” For when I have been late, incompetent, forgetful, confused, fallen behind, because I’ve been depressed and can fail to care about this system that pains me. I feel academic guilt so often, especially when I find it too difficult to go to class. I hate having guilt toward school; I am in pain, and yet I feel as if I have done something “morally wrong.” In November of my junior year of high school, I was hospitalized in an adolesc…
