---
title: "Class Struggle, Commodification and Modernized Society"
author: "Kevin Tucker"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-tucker-class-struggle-commodification-and-modernized-society"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Species Traitor 2 Retrieved on February 20th, 2009 from www.insurgentdesire.org.uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-tucker-class-struggle-commodification-and-modernized-society.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-tucker-class-struggle-commodification-and-modernized-society.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Rise and Fall of Class Struggle        Industrial and Post-Industrial Workers        The Death of Class-Consciousness        The Effects of Commodification        The Dangers of Industrial Society        The Revolt Against Work        The Transitory Dilemma        Colonization and its Discontents        Contemporary Revolt “Forget those commies, I don’t want to work in their factories. Why is it that all these intellectuals and rich college kids think work is cool...It’s only people who have never worked at a dead end job with no future that thinks us working class people give a shit who runs the factory. Work is work; no matter if the boss is a capitalist or all of us.” —Craig E. quoted from Essays Towards a New Eco-Anarchism , Chris Kortright Is class struggle still relevant? The relics of decaying leftist movements would still like us to hold onto this bit of his-story long past its due. As the anti-State publication Black Star North claims, “Suggestions that class struggle is no longer relevant to revolutionary theory and practice should be met with high suspicion. Those who make such claims are either naïve, misguided, or middle/upper class and unwilling to confront their privilege.” (“Towards an Understanding of Class Struggle in the 21 st Century”, BSN #3 pg. 27) Class struggle undoubtedly has its specific origins within the rise of industrial society. The stages of society permeating the social turn in emphasis on production from food rearing to specialization within the varying fields of material goods that accent the idealistic wealth of the times. Agrarian societies certainly had their rich, but most class warriors will focus their attention towards the industrial age that will follow (a detail that will always cause a major problem of historical analysis in the class struggle perspective). The rise of class struggle, in the industrial sense that it is most commonly referred to as, comes along during the ages of increasing mechanization and automation. A steady increase from human based power sources to machine based. The technological “advancements” made during this progression made a huge impact on the degrees of severity felt by the working class (the producers). Needless to say, this was accompanied by increasing profits for the upper class (the owners). It seems extremely important to recognize the differences between the societies of that time and now. The consumer society we live in now is a world apart from the industrial period of yester years (Granted that the same situation still exists, but has just changed on scale considering that the industrial process has not yet been fully automated, but relocated into the extending ‘labor pools’ of second and third world peoples thanks to our globalizing economy.). The vast amounts of labor required by industrial production, and the little amounts of wealth left off to the working class, made such nuances as general stores and vast shopping areas close to nonexistent. The service sector was therefore a mere percentage of the workers, compared to our current society in which this makes up the majority of work being done. This constant force of dividing labor into more mundane and meaningless positions has completely altered the face of the work force. The worker in our modern stratified society has become even further alienated than the pre-Ford assembly line factory models that Marx spoke of. The effect, in turn, has caused an even greater loss of individual ‘meaning’ in a society flooded with workerist ethics. The entire scenario was hardly even something to be considered in the times of social uprising prior to the Second World War, despite the major steps towards modernization being made throughout the 1800s’ up until this time of ‘material prosperity’, or more commonly misconstrued as the ‘affluent society’ (see Clive Pontings’ Green History of the World ). This is the society in which we (the privileged first world, who most likely make up the entir…
