---
title: "The Formation of Local Councils"
author: "Omar Aziz"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/omar-aziz-the-formation-of-local-councils"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "To Live in Revolutionary Time"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "omar-aziz-the-formation-of-local-councils.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/omar-aziz-the-formation-of-local-councils.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       To Live in Revolutionary Time: Translator’s Introduction to The Formation of Local Councils by Omar Aziz        Introduction from October 2011: Authority’s time and revolutionary time        Introduction from February 2012: Linking collective self-defense and continuing the revolution        The Formation of Local Councils: Main text from February 2012          1) Human interdependence and civil solidarity          2) On relationships between individuals: Creating new common interests          3) On the relationship with the Free Syrian Army : The need to protect communities while continuing the revolution          4) On the formation of local councils and their organizational structure          5) The role of the National Council        A Note on the Text On 17 February 2013, the Local Coordination Committees of the Syrian revolution reported that Omar Aziz, prominent Syrian intellectual, economist, and long-time anarchist dissident, died of a heart attack in the central Adra prison. Held incommunicado by the air force intelligence since 20 November 2012, the big and warm – albeit ailing – heart of Omar Aziz could not stand almost three months of detention inside the infamous dungeons of the Assad regime. The reports of his passing emerged on the second anniversary of the Hariqa market protest, when 1,500 Syrians vowed for the first time not to be humiliated in the heart of Old Damascus. Aziz leaves behind a rich, significant legacy of ground-breaking intellectual, social and political contributions as well as an unfinished revolution and a country in desperate need for people like him. (Budour Hassan: Rest in Power) Omar Aziz, revolutionary anarchist born in Damascus, was a friend and comrade to many and is fondly remembered and deeply missed. His text, The Formation of Local Councils , remains one of the core strategic proposals of the social revolution in Syria. He first published it in late 2011, and then released an expanded and revised version in February 2012 with a new introduction. This present translation offers the introductions to both versions and the full text of the second version. It doesn’t seem that Omar’s intention was to produce a static, finished text — with his emphasis on adapting to local context and changing conditions, it’s likely he would have continued to revise and change his proposals. You will notice some repetition between the two introductions, which is simply because the second was written to replace the first, and so they weren’t meant to be displayed side by side. Although Omar’s name is somewhat well known, there has not been an adequate English translation of his writings. As well, the text was very much an internal document, circulated among people organizing in Syria. There are large sections presented as bulleted lists of proposals, and there is essentially no context given. The Formation of Local Councils was only published publicly online after Omar’s death in 2013; perhaps the lack of translation since then reflects the difficulty of presenting this important text to an English-speaking public in a way that allows it to be understood. However, the text is tremendously rich and offers many concrete ideas and reflections for those in western countries engaged in struggle against the state and reactionaries, and for autonomy and freedom. This introduction will seek to provide some of the background needed to understand The Formation of Local Councils in context, and for this we will draw on texts written by Leila al-Shami and Budour Hassan. We will also share translated excerpts of the introduction to the French translation of Omar’s text by Éditions Antisociales, published in November 2013 under the title The Revolution of Everyday Life Under Sniper Fire . As well, we believe it’s important to situate this text within the debates and priorities that exist, broadly-speaking, within the anglophone anarchist world; this also speaks to some of the decisions made while translating. …
