---
title: "The Anarchists Who Liberated Paris, & Why They Did It"
author: "Robert P. Helms"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-p-helms-the-anarchists-who-liberated-paris-why-they-did-it"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Anarcho-Syndicalist Review no. 40, winter 2004–5, pp. 27–29. Notes by the Kate Sharpley Library. Retrieved on 3rd March 2024 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "robert-p-helms-the-anarchists-who-liberated-paris-why-they-did-it.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-p-helms-the-anarchists-who-liberated-paris-why-they-did-it.epub"
    hosted: false
---

This year [2004] has marked the 60 th anniversary of the liberation of France from the Nazis and their puppet government, which was headquartered at the town of Vichy. One fact that’s not often celebrated is that the first allied soldiers to enter Paris and drive to the Hôtel de Ville were a tank company, comprised of 120 Spanish Anarchists who had wound up, together as a unit, in the army of Maréchal Philippe Leclerc. [1] Before examining the proud and special case of these comrades, let me touch upon how Paris remembers that day; what the day means elsewhere in France; why it was so important that the fascist regime was crushed. It’s not so easy to say who was more intensely hated by the French People in the final days of the occupation: the Germans or the Vichy police. Neither were loved, but the French fascists and those who collaborated with them were hated more intimately, for more personal reasons. I have only recently become European, having moved house less than a year ago. I’m a newcomer, and before that I was a history-obsessed tourist who dropped in now and then. What can I share about this year of memory, especially just this past August 25 th , when Paris was decked out with the national colors, and actors drove along the grand boulevards in period uniforms and old military vehicles? Let’s start early in the morning, when I leave my suburban apartment, on my way to work in the city. At the other end of my street, before I even reach the bus stop, there is a stone plaque on the front of an ordinary two-story house. It reads, “Raymond Langlois was born here on June 30, 1922. Arrested for resistance on October 13, 1940, he died for France while in deportation, on December 15, 1943, at Auschwitz.” In other words, three months into the fascist period, 18-year old Raymond acted against the regime in some way that is probably not known to anyone on my street, and so they took him away, they used him as a slave for three years, and then they murdered him. I walk another ten minutes to the train station at Noisy-le-Sec. As with just about every station in France, there is a plaque on it, bearing the names of the railroad workers, based at that particular station, who were shot for sabotaging train lines, helping Jews get out of the country, killing nazis, or for some other good deed during the war. But Noisy-le-Sec has an unusual sadness that is memorialized in the cemetery alongside the station. On the night of April 18, 1944, allied bombers had the job of destroying Noisy’s important “marshalling yard.” This happens to be a spot along the region’s railway system where there are branches going off in various directions, as well as car and equipment storage areas, all of which were vital to the fascist operations. The bombers, from the USA and Canada, not only destroyed the railroad operations, but three-quarters of the town’s buildings as well. There were 420 civilian deaths in that one night of friendly-fire bombardment. The ten-minute ride into the city is a boring one, especially for those who have already done it. I like to take a slightly different walk from the station to work each day so as to know the city better as the weeks go by, and of course to break the monotony. Near where I get off the regional train line is Gare de l’Est (The East Train Station). It has a designated area inside, where large stone plaques tell travelers a few basics about the Nazi-Vichy period in France. One slab lists the names of 70 men and 8 women who worked at that station and who died resisting the fascists. Another slab, which can be missed by a passer-by only with difficulty, states that between 1942 and 1944, more than 70,000 Jews (of which 11,000 were children), were deported from France to Nazi death camps. All of them were sorted out and documented, then sent to the camps from certain suburban train yards, including Drancy and Bobigny. The shame of those towns revisits me whenever I pass through them, which is fairly often beca…
