---
title: "Democracy and Conspiracy: Overlaps, Parallels, and Standard Operating Procedures"
author: "Lawrence Jarach"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lawrence-jarach-democracy-and-conspiracy-overlaps-parallels-and-standard-operating-procedures"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From “Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed” #60, Fall/Winter 2005–05, Vol. 23, No. 2."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lawrence-jarach-democracy-and-conspiracy-overlaps-parallels-and-standard-operating-procedures.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lawrence-jarach-democracy-and-conspiracy-overlaps-parallels-and-standard-operating-procedures.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Mythic Appeal of Democracy        The Mythic Appeal of Conspiracy        What’s New in Conspiratology        Realities of Democracy        Investigation and Exposure; The Myth of Liberalism        Anarchism and Conspiracy        The Realities and Irrelevance of Conspiracy A myth isn’t a lie-it is a story told by people with a particular outlook to others with a similar outlook. It can contain truth and falsehood in varying mixtures and ratios, but the important thing is that it makes sense to its audience. According to the believers in Democracy ( rule of the people — however “the people” is defined and narrowed to exclude particular segments from participation in government), it is a system of decision-making that enables the rule of the wisest and most capable and skillful, regardless of hereditary class privilege; this is its republican (anti-monarchist) heritage. Democrats (especially those who identify with the tradition of Liberalism) believe that majority rule provides more voice in decision-making for more people. They believe that more representation means more fairness, that a more informed voting base increases the wisdom of representatives, which furthers the responsiveness and fairness of said representatives. For democrats, information is power. These are some of the myths of Democracy and they are tirelessly promoted by the State through public school indoctrination and fanciful media images. The reality, though, is a bit different. Most democrats (who rule, rather than those who only aspire to rule) know that democracy is fragile and as easy to manipulate as any other style of government. They operate under the assumption that “the people” will always be unprepared to rule themselves, and therefore those who are the most wise and ethical have the paternalistic responsibility-nay, duty — to take upon themselves the heavy elitist burden to govern the rest of us. Duplicity is integral to democratic government (the less apologetically dictatorial forms we will leave out of the current discussion, but the parallels should be obvious); most people who live under democratic rulers don’t like to be reminded that they are incompetent (and yet the unprepared and immature people are magically transformed into fully informed, rational agents when it comes time to choose their representatives). A political conspiracy is a self-selecting group of people who get together privately in order to plan and implement a particular agenda with the goal of increasing power and social control. I take it for granted that all kinds of political conspiracies exist; some might just prefer to refer to these conspiracies as skirmishes in the class war, and I wouldn’t disagree. The term “conspiracy theory,” however, is a derisive dismissal of any possibility that private or clandestine agendas could operate (semi-)publicly in a democracy, and for that reason the term is useless and obnoxious; those who invoke it clearly wish to equate it with fantasy or falsehood despite all evidence to the contrary. One of the greatest of unintentional (or perhaps not!) ironies occurs when obvious conspirators (like some of the current crop: Bush, Cheney, Kissinger, etc.) pooh-pooh any and all counter-narratives as “conspiracy theories.” Conspiracy theories work the same way as other myths, and (for their adherents at least) have supplanted the otherwise dominant democratic myths of American culture. But because I am unhappy with the way the term “conspiracy theory” is used, I have decided to replace it with a new term to describe how people think about and analyze these conspiracies: Conspiratology; the study and exposure of conspiracies and their respective conspirators. A shift has occurred in American conspiracy lore in the past several decades. From the time of the founding of the United States until the Watergate scandal, conspiratologists were, almost to a person, politically reactionary: they suspected of subversion anyone with questionabl…
