---
title: "Clarification of the Revolutionary Anarchist Front"
author: "Revolutionary Anarchist Front"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/revolutionary-anarchist-front-clarification-of-the-revolutionary-anarchist-front"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Original translation. Retrieved on 1st March 2023 from cedema.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "revolutionary-anarchist-front-clarification-of-the-revolutionary-anarchist-front.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/revolutionary-anarchist-front-clarification-of-the-revolutionary-anarchist-front.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In view of the socio-political hustle and bustle at the end of the year, we met once again to share fraternally among all those who have acted so far, to share in the same way with comrades who have now returned to our ranks, to welcome new comrades, to discuss the social developments that afflict us, and to reaffirm our libertarian socialist and insurrectionalist stance that moves us to act. After extensive discussion, we have come to the conclusion to disseminate our perspective through the following points: We categorically abhor the murder in Greece of the young Alexandro Grigoropoulus and we welcome all the days of protest that took place in repudiation of this fascist murder! However, we publicly regret that here in Chile there has not been a social effervescence to demonstrate a clear repudiation of murders such as those of Rodrigo Cisternas and Jhonny Cariqueo. We strongly support the General Assembly of Insurgent Workers of Athens, towards the construction of an international solidarity network of libertarian workers! We salute the comrades of the Rodrigo Cisternas Rebel and Insurrectional Youth! Forward comrades! Matías Catrileo remains alive in all our actions! For the independence of Wallmapu! We also abhor the new actions of the fascist repressive apparatuses in the south of Chile against the organisational and independence movements of Wallmapu. After the fire at the Automotora Goma in Temuco, we were able to personally witness the fascist rage, the operations, and the “peaceful” but contemptuous and racist attitude of the police, the ratis, the militia and certain sectors and institutions towards the peñi and lamiel. We were spectators of the national strike of the tax employees. We welcome the militant union of the workers, but we reject the aim of the strike: union revisionism led by the heads of the unions and federations, which was aimed only at reforming the economic income of the workers, an income that will have to be reformed in a while. We also want to refer to the accusations made by the armed and heartless Jean Marc Roullian Group. However, we will only refer to clarify certain details, as our intention will never be to disqualify someone without telling them personally or based on the hypothesis of something we do not know. 1. “(...) The lack of originality of what they have written is revealed in the basic copying of terms, in a work of “cut and paste” from other writings or from what we have heard or read (...)”. First: we have written all our communiqués in our own handwriting; second: we have indeed copied and pasted extracts from communiqués of other organisations, but with the aim of disseminating the existence of these organisations and vindicating their discourse as well as their praxis, always highlighting the quoted texts in inverted commas; third: our theory is not based on our own handwriting: our theory is in no way based on “what we have heard or read”, since we have spent much of our time reading and discussing the postmodernist texts of Alfredo Bonnano, Wolfi Landstreicher, etc., as well as a host of anonymous insurrectionalist texts. 2. “(...) so is the — laughable — symbol that characterises them (a classic anarchist A crossed by a rifle, the exacerbation of the weapon as a symbolic element that denotes the root of the person who devised this logo, something very typical of left-wing militarist organisations and of state militarists, assuming that in this Chilean reality the militarist left does not lead the state)(...)”. First: if you think that the image we use in a symbolic way is derisory — it is an image that we use in a symbolic way to visually represent FAR, it is not a symbol that we use to identify ourselves, since, in essence, the symbols that characterise us are the same that characterise any individuality or libertarian group — well, your opinion is respectable, everyone thinks what they want about anything; secondly, by using the classic anarchist A in the logo of the F…
