---
title: "An Anarchist FAQ: Freedom Interview"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-an-anarchist-faq-freedom-interview"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Freedom Interview about An Anarchist FAQ Retrieved on 28th January 2021 from anarchism.pageabode.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarcho-an-anarchist-faq-freedom-interview.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-an-anarchist-faq-freedom-interview.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Freedom: What is the FAQ?        How many people have contributed to the FAQ and is there a driving collective behind it?        How was much of the research and writing done?        What sort of people or what backgrounds have been involved?        How long is it due to be (one rumour has been upwards of two volumes of 1,000 pages each!) and how comprehensive do you think it is?        What was the impetus to begin the project and are there any spin-off ideas etc that are being considered?        How successful has the website been and was its growth a prod to produce the book?        The FAQ has been controversially cited in places such as Wikipedia (along with elements of the FAQ itself) as a potential ‘official’ source of information on the subject of anarchism. Would you say this is a vindication of the book’s purpose, an accurate portrayal?        Why do you think the FAQ is being viewed in this way?        What have been your favourite parts of putting the book together? What have been the best bits of feedback on the website?        How long has it been in the making?        Do you have backers and if so, who?        Why do you think this is a good time to be bringing the FAQ out on paper? Published in Freedom , 7 th October 2006 (vol. 67 no. 19). Freedom is the leading English-language anarchist newspaper, published fortnightly in London. Originally founded by Kropotkin in 1886, it is still going strong 120 years later. It is a long, but comprehensive, webpage of “Frequently Asked Questions” about anarchism on the internet (www.anarchistfaq.org) and soon to be a book by AK Press. It covers most of the obvious questions you would expect, plus some more obscure ones. It attempts to present anarchism as a serious political theory and movement to those interested in finding out about it as well as being a resource for anarchists. Lots of people have contributed to it, most of them probably unknowingly as cut and paste has been applied to good arguments and points made by anarchists all the time. There is a collective, although numbers fluctuate as people take breaks and volunteer. I have been there from the start and am the main contributor and editor as well as doing the revisions for publication. Initially, we had a list of what we thought an anarchist FAQ should contain. People volunteered to do different sections and did the necessary research and writing. Once the initial framework was there, additions have been made as they were deemed required. Usually when a new anarchist book comes out and it contains a good quote, argument or fact but also when we notice new arguments against anarchism or it looks like comrades need help with certain subjects. For specific areas (for example, economics and history) we use the net and libraries to find qualified sources to bolster our arguments. But as far as anarchism goes, we consider anarchists to be the relevant experts and base ourselves on the movement and what its members say and do. Just your typical anarchists, working class people who believe strongly in anarchism and seek to convince others of our ideas. We are not academics – we have real jobs! The collective has seen many nationalities and we have got contributions from anarchists across the globe. Well, I’ll give some figures. Section A (“What is Anarchism?”) is slightly over 104,000 words. In total, excluding appendices, it is over 890,000 words. And most of that has not been revised! The length indicates its comprehensiveness, I would say. It is long because we want to make it a valuable resource for the anarchist movement and to convince sympathetic people that our ideas are worth considering. Also, we have to spend a lot of time refuting frequently asserted nonsense about anarchism. It always takes up more space to refute a falsehood than to make it. If Leninists could bother to read a book about anarchism before spouting off about it, the FAQ would be a lot shorter… It all dates back to the early 1990s w…
