---
title: "Anabaptist movement"
author: "Soma Marik"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/soma-marik-anabaptist-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest. Retrieved on 21st November 2021 from onlinelibrary.wiley.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "soma-marik-anabaptist-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/soma-marik-anabaptist-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       MAIN CURRENTS        THE MÜNSTER REBELLION        REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS The Reformation had several strands, including the “Radical Reformation,” which refers to all individuals and groups who rejected both the Roman Catholic tradition and the mainstream Protestant alternatives. Many radicals and their leaders, mostly literate ex-clergy, rejected any connection with the state and any state church. They appealed to the same audience and used some of the same anti-Roman or anti-clerical arguments as did the preachers of the mainstream Reformation, but they had a more popular social base. Often called Anabaptists, or “rebaptizers” by their contemporary Catholic and Protestant enemies, they advocated adult rather than infant baptism and saw the church as a body of saints in which membership was voluntary, and the most severe form of discipline was banning or shunning. In their separation from the temporal domain, many Anabaptist groups refused to serve the state as magistrates or soldiers, and some even refused to pay war taxes. In Switzerland, Anabaptism developed from Conrad Grebel’s circle and priests from the outlying areas of Zurich. Seeing the Bible as an alternative authority to Rome, these “Swiss Brethren” sought to purify the city’s religion of Catholic elements like the mass and establish self-governing people’s churches in the rural communities. They opposed tithes, or the payment of one-tenth of produce as tax to the church. In 1525 their meetings were forbidden, and parents were ordered to have their infants baptized within eight days or face expulsion from the city. In response, on January 21, Conrad Grebel, a layman often called the “first Anabaptist,” baptized George Blaurock, an ordained priest. The movement spread rapidly. The Brethren began evangelizing the surrounding territories with great success, converting and baptizing many. Leaders were arrested and rebaptism was banned by the council on March 7, 1526. The penalty for disobedience was death by drowning. In December Blaurock, who was not a citizen of Zurich, was tried and was whipped and banished. Felix Manz was executed by drowning on January 5, 1527, thereby becoming the first Anabaptist martyr. The attempt to emerge as a mass movement failed, and there emerged instead the idea of the church of a separated minority. By 1527, Swiss Anabaptists were being unified through the Schleitheim Confession. Drafted by Michael Sattler, this document attempted to separate congregations of Anabaptist followers from non-believers. Radical reforming zeal and peasant radicalism also combined in southern Germany. The “Zwickau Prophets,” Thomas Dreschel, Nicolas Storch, and Mark Thomas Stübner, claimed to be directly commanded by the Holy Spirit and rejected infant baptism and any authority other than the spiritual command of God. They in turn influenced Thomas Müntzer, a priest who became acquainted with Martin Luther around 1519. During the Peasant Rebellion in 1524–5, Müntzer supported the peasants’ cause. Seeing the events of 1525 as resistance to godless tyranny and God’s instrument to purify Christendom, he placed his considerable talents at the disposal of the great uprising of the peasants and “common man.” Although not its instigator, he became one of its theologically most articulate defenders, ultimately being tortured and beheaded for the cause. Other German Anabaptists included Hans Hut, who disagreed with the need to form separatist communities, and Balthasar Hubmaier, who believed that the state was ordained by God, envisaged the possibility of a Christian magistrate, and sanctioned capital punishment and just wars. Hut’s more radical followers called for common ownership of goods and denied that Christians could use the sword in self-defense, serve as magistrates, or pay taxes. Another radical faction from Austerlitz, which followed Jacob Hutter and was known as Hutterites, was the first Anabaptist community to form a completely communist…
