---
title: "Beyond Ideology"
author: "Yavor Tarinski"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-beyond-ideology"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 27th April 2023 from new-compass.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yavor-tarinski-beyond-ideology.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-beyond-ideology.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Ideology and non-contextuality        Beyond Ideology: Context is all        Conclusion Ideology castrates ideas, turning them into sterile and mummified dogmas that cannot exist beyond their initial form. If we are going to challenge the existing order, we will have to move beyond ideology. This does not mean abdicating from our ideas and principles, but their constant re-evaluation and development. In the debate between Simon Springer and David Harvey [1] on what ideological frame the radical geography should adopt, Harvey’s proposal for letting radical geography free of any particular “ism” seems to make a lot of sense. And although their polemical texts discuss, at first sight, the matter of radical geography, in my opinion, they have also a wider importance for the whole question of the role of ideology in the project for social liberation and emancipation. With few exceptions, the proposal of freeing ourselves from ideology seems highly neglected from the movements for social emancipation, and I think this is a big mistake if we want to actually involve more people in the movements and act constructively. We see activists and thinkers being busy trying to keep their ideological “purity”, often engaging in endless discussions on what is “Anarchist”, “Marxist” or whatever. Do not get me wrong, I do not mean to abandon theory as such in the name of direct action. On the contrary, I think that theoretical research and critical thinking are essential for effective action. But Ideology must not be mistaken with theory. The Situationist International defines Ideology as a doctrine of interpretation of existing facts [2] , which can be understood as thinking in a non-contextual way. What that means is that the ideologue creates certain type of analysis, influenced by his context (social environment, economic development, culture, etc.) and constantly tries to fit in it realities, born in different contexts, which often leads to non-understanding. We can see this clearly, for example, in the reactions of certain anarchists and marxists (having purist class analysis based solely on realities of 19 th century industrial Europe), which are judging the events in Rojava, searching there for a “proletariat” that does not exist in the classical Western sense. In this line of thought, ideology castrates the ideas one has, turning them into sterile and mummified dogmas that cannot exist beyond their initial form. The “ideologized” ideas become incompatible with contexts that differ from the ones that have given them birth, and in a way, they become useless. The ideological non-contextuality obstructs both the theoretical research and the activity subsequent from it. Ideology creates dogmatic notion of utopia and excludes everything that does not fit in it, even if there are some common principles (as we saw above the case of Rojava), creating a sort of self-alienating elitist subculture. [3] Thus ideology becomes more self-expressive than instrumental. It morphs into specific identity, often serving as an excuse for abdicating from broad social affairs. Instead, it creates its own circle of self-interest, open mainly to likeminded (sharing same ideology) individuals who remove themselves voluntarily from the institutions and social networks of the society which they potentially could influence. As Jonathan Matthew Smucker points out: […] when we do not contest the cultures, beliefs, symbols, narratives, etc. of the existing institutions and social networks that we are part of, we also walk away from the resources and power embedded within them. In exchange for a shabby little activist clubhouse, we give away the whole farm. We let our opponents have everything. [4] Because of its non-contextual character, ideology can be viewed as part of the dominant paradigm, based on bureaucratic logic, which needs to frame everything into “comfortable” fixed boxes, i.e. strict social and political roles, thus creating and strengthening identity…
