---
title: "Chemicals are good for you"
author: "Henry O’Mad"
date: "2011"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/henry-o-mad-chemicals-are-good-for-you"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 8 February 2011 from easyweb.easynet.co.uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "henry-o-mad-chemicals-are-good-for-you.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/henry-o-mad-chemicals-are-good-for-you.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The chemical industry has been able to make the stunning revelation that everything is made of chemicals! Chemicals are in fact perfectly natural substances and we are fools for worrying about them. Apparently thousands of the so-called ‘natural’ products of the earth are laced with nasty toxic substances, of which, of course, we were all unaware until this startling discovery was made known to humankind. Somebody better invent a time machine quick, or we’re all in trouble unless we can tell our ancestors! The truth is, though, that we evolved over time (according to latest theory...) to be adapted to certain levels of certain toxins; those that were around when we were. Toxicity is not easily definable anyway — many trace elements are absolutely essential to our life, yet toxic in very slightly higher doses. As with all other attempts we make to categorise everything, our categories are pretty arbitrary if we look closely. As we evolved along with everything else, we kept in balance or (yes — they hate this word but I’m gonna use it!) harmony with everything else. The word ‘harmony’ sends many an earth raper into foaming fits. They say that there is no such thing as the ‘harmony of nature’, but this is because they don’t know what harmony is. Any musician can tell you that far from being blissful peace and co-existence, harmony is the product of what we see as conflict. For two notes to exist in harmony they must interact in a way that severely disrupts both of them. The difference between harmony and discordance is that the interactions in harmony produce something coherent, whereas disharmony produces greater degrees of incoherence as it goes further from harmony. What two notes in harmony produce is something else that wasn’t present in either originally. This then continues in the same way until one or other changes. The further the notes go from harmony, the weaker their product becomes. If you move one note upwards, say, you will eventually reach a new and totally different harmony, and half way between the two is a point where the two harmonies are of equal strength (or weakness). Bear with me, this is relevant... Of course it’s all a lot more complicated than that (or simpler, depending on how closely you look) but that will do for this purpose. In nature, it is like there are countless billions of notes, and they achieve a kind of harmony. If they didn’t, we wouldn’t be around long enough to think about it. I don’t know how this happens, and I don’t want to waste time finding out. All I know is that if you detune an old analog synthesizer a bit (mine had four oscillators, or notes it could produce at once) and leave it humming away for a few minutes, lo and behold, it tunes itself! Also, I read in a whacky book called ‘Stalking the Wild Pendulum’ by Itzhak Bentov, that if you put a row of clocks on a wall (in theory) with identical pendulums (?) and identical energy input, they would eventually go in synchronicity with each other, even if they started out in different positions. The point of all this is that if we disrupt the present harmony (which is already changing all the time naturally) by too great a degree, the whole system will shift into a different set of harmonies, which are very unlikely to include us. We ourselves are becoming more and more disharmonic with everything else as each day passes. It’s time for a few examples. Aluminium is present all over the planet. It is highly toxic to much of life. It is present in most soils, but in a form which is not soluble, so it just stays there and does no harm. This is not a co-incidence, probably if this had never been the case over the time of life on earth it would not be toxic to us, it could even have ended up as an essential nutrient, like, say, molybdenum, which is also present in most soil. [1] In our blind stampede towards the abyss of progress, we have seriously affected the distribution of aluminium. This, to go back to the harmony thing, is like alter…
