---
title: "An Anarchist FAQ"
author: "Ed Boraas, Dave Neal, Gary Elkin, Iain McKay"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-anarchist-faq-editorial-collective-an-anarchist-faq-full"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Version 15.4 (17-Mar-2020)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-anarchist-faq-editorial-collective-an-anarchist-faq-full.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-anarchist-faq-editorial-collective-an-anarchist-faq-full.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     An Anarchist FAQ after 21 years      An Anarchist FAQ after 20 years      An Anarchist FAQ after ten years    Introduction      Welcome to our FAQ on anarchism    An Anarchist FAQ: Introduction to Volume 1      A Summation    Section A — What is Anarchism?      A.1 What is anarchism?        A.1.1 What does “anarchy” mean?        A.1.2 What does “anarchism” mean?        A.1.3 Why is anarchism also called libertarian socialism?        A.1.4 Are anarchists socialists?        A.1.5 Where does anarchism come from?      A.2 What does anarchism stand for?        A.2.1 What is the essence of anarchism?        A.2.2 Why do anarchists emphasise liberty?        A.2.3 Are anarchists in favour of organisation?        A.2.4 Are anarchists in favour of “absolute” liberty?        A.2.5 Why are anarchists in favour of equality?        A.2.6 Why is solidarity important to anarchists?        A.2.7 Why do anarchists argue for self-liberation?        A.2.8 Is it possible to be an anarchist without opposing hierarchy?        A.2.9 What sort of society do anarchists want?        A.2.10 What will abolishing hierarchy mean and achieve?        A.2.11 Why are most anarchists in favour of direct democracy?        A.2.12 Is consensus an alternative to direct democracy?        A.2.13 Are anarchists individualists or collectivists?        A.2.14 Why is voluntarism not enough?        A.2.15 What about “human nature”?        A.2.16 Does anarchism require “perfect” people to work?        A.2.17 Aren’t most people too stupid for a free society to work?        A.2.18 Do anarchists support terrorism?        A.2.19 What ethical views do anarchists hold?        A.2.20 Why are most anarchists atheists?      A.3 What types of anarchism are there?        A.3.1 What are the differences between individualist and social anarchists?        A.3.2 Are there different types of social anarchism?        A.3.3 What kinds of green anarchism are there?        A.3.4 Is anarchism pacifistic?        A.3.5 What is Anarcha-Feminism?        A.3.6 What is Cultural Anarchism?        A.3.7 Are there religious anarchists?        A.3.8 What is “anarchism without adjectives” ?        A.3.9 What is anarcho-primitivism?      A.4 Who are the major anarchist thinkers?        A.4.1 Are there any thinkers close to anarchism?        A.4.2 Are there any liberal thinkers close to anarchism?        A.4.3 Are there any socialist thinkers close to anarchism?        A.4.4 Are there any Marxist thinkers close to anarchism?      A.5 What are some examples of “Anarchy in Action”?        A.5.1 The Paris Commune        A.5.2 The Haymarket Martyrs        A.5.3 Building the Syndicalist Unions        A.5.4 Anarchists in the Russian Revolution        A.5.5 Anarchists in the Italian Factory Occupations        A.5.6 Anarchism and the Spanish Revolution        A.5.7 The May-June Revolt in France, 1968    Section B — Why do anarchists oppose the current system?      B.1 Why are anarchists against authority and hierarchy?        B.1.1 What are the effects of authoritarian social relationships?        B.1.2 Is capitalism hierarchical?        B.1.3 What kind of hierarchy of values does capitalism create?        B.1.4 Why do racism, sexism and homophobia exist?        B.1.5 How is the mass-psychological basis for authoritarian civilisation created?        B.1.6 Can hierarchy be ended?      B.2 Why are anarchists against the state?        B.2.1 What is main function of the state?        B.2.2 Does the state have subsidiary functions?        B.2.3 How does the ruling class maintain control of the state?        B.2.4 How does state centralisation affect freedom?        B.2.5 Who benefits from centralisation?        B.2.6 Can the state be an independent power within society?      B.3 Why are anarchists against private property?        B.3.1 What is the difference between private property and possession?        B.3.2 What kinds of property does the state protect?        B.3.3 Why is property exploitative?        B.3.4 Ca…
