---
title: "Author and Authority"
author: "Matt Black"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matt-black-author-and-authority"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "1995 Mar/Apr issue of L&amp;R. Retrieved on 2016-06-13 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "matt-black-author-and-authority.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matt-black-author-and-authority.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Philosophy and Politics        Subjectivity        Authority        Authority and Subjectivity        How Authority Destroys Subjectivity        Anarchism and Authority        Beyond Anarchism        Human Nature        Possible Sources of Personal Authority        Strategy and Practice        Conclusion Anarchism is in trouble. Despite the gradual growth and strengthening of the anarchist movement over the past 10 years—more newspapers, journals, bookstores, actions, etc.—we aren’t really engaged in changing the society. This failure isn’t caused simply because we aren’t working hard enough, but because we are adrift ideologically. In fact we are working hard, but with very little idea of why we are doing what we are doing. Contemporary anarchist politics seems to be based on a kind of loose pragmatism: forming a political organization seems like a good idea, opening a bookstore seems like a good idea, publishing newspapers and journals seems like a good idea. But our “good ideas” haven’t matured into a course of action. To quote old what’s-his-name, we are doing a lot, but with no real idea of what is to be done. To be effective revolutionaries—to change the world—we need to believe that we are part of the revolution now. I think that we will only be able to believe this preposterous idea if we have developed a strategic vision of the process of revolution that begins today and continues into the new society. I think that the “revolutionary anarchist” section of the anarchist movement is the group most likely to develop such a strategic vision. I think that this rough revolutionary anarchist politics is fairly close to coalescing into a coherent, if not totally worked out, strategy. But I think that there are several barriers in the way, two of the most important being: our reliance on a loose and somewhat flimsy set of philosophical ideas to justify our politics, and a lack of a theory of the process of empowerment. In other words, we lack convincing arguments both about why people might throw off their chains, and about how they might do so. It is these two questions that I attempt to address in this article. Politics is based on philosophy. For each idea we have about what is happening in the world, we have some idea about why we think it is happening. Our criticisms of this society, and our vision of a possible future society, are based on ideas about human nature, justice, morality, subjectivity, etc. Clearly, if our ideas about these subjects are not correct, then our politics will not succeed: if people are really greedy, violent and selfish by nature, we will not be able to build a society based on mutual aid and cooperation. If we want to change the world, we cannot rely uncritically on our philosophical assumptions; we have to ruthlessly challenge and correct them. Equally important, we have to be able to argue for our ideas and defend them against attacks by people with other ideas. The problem is, most of the most important philosophical ideas on which we base our politics are not provable. Is there a god? Who knows? Is there a determined human nature? How would we prove this one way of the other? Are there such things as justice and morality? Is there a knowable “reality,” or is our concept of the real created by the fictions we use to explain things? We can’t answer these questions, but we also can’t fall into the trap of inaction: that we cannot act because we cannot base our actions on anything because we cannot be sure of anything. It seems to me that our goal should not be to stop believing because we cannot prove the existence of the things we believe in, but to believe in a way that does not make us prisoners of our preconceptions. That is, I think we need to believe critically. I’m not arguing that we should believe in any bullshit if it looks like it might allow us to destroy this society; just the opposite, I am arguing that what we believe and how we believe will determine whether or not we are…
