---
title: "Class Struggle Unionism"
author: "Tom Wetzel"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-wetzel-class-struggle-unionism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Review"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tom-wetzel-class-struggle-unionism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-wetzel-class-struggle-unionism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Class Struggle Strategy and Tactics        The Problem of the Bureaucratic Layer        The Militant Minority “The labor movement today is in miserable shape, probably worse than in any period of labor history,” writes Joe Burns. To get out of this situation and rebuild unionism as an effective fighting force, Burns proposes a revival of “class struggle unionism” where unions are seen as a vehicle of direct, worker-led struggle against the owning class, whose interests are flatly antagonistic to the interests of workers. Since World War 2, a whole legal cage of repressive labor laws and unfavorable rulings of the elite judiciary have been crafted to block workers from legal use of the most effective tactics, such as secondary boycotts, workplace occupations, and effective strikes that shut down workplaces. Burns proposes a revival of these class struggle tactics, and thus labor organizations must figure out how to roll over injunctions and violate unjust laws. The book is both a clearly-written proposal for a new direction and a look at the dominant approaches in the AFL-CIO-type unions. Burns explains class struggle unionism by contrasting it with two other approaches — traditional business unionism and a newer approach that Burns calls “labor liberalism.” Labor liberalism is a kind of evolution from the older business unionism that has become dominant among the bureaucratic layer of paid officials and staff in many unions today. SEIU is the clearest example of the labor liberal approach while the older form of business unionism is still dominant in the building trades. Labor liberalism tends to adopt the language of “progressive” left wing politics despite a top-down staff-driven approach that fails to develop worker leadership of struggles. The business union practice and ideology was already pretty well developed in the AFL by the World War 1 era. I would describe its main features as follows: Acceptance of the capitalist profits system and an orientation to “partnership” with the employers Although officers are elected, there tends to be a monopolization of decision-making authority and union expertise in a bureaucratic hierarchy. “Collective bargaining” of no-strike contracts by paid officials A narrow sectoralist practice focused on economic fights with individual employers Lack of any direct way for workers in different industries to get together to develop a common class-wide program Burns focuses on the first two of these features. Class struggle unionism, on the other hand, starts with a recognition of the flat incompatibility of interests between working people and the capitalist owning class. The control of the workplace and society by “the billionaire class” is seen as illegitimate. Thus, class struggle unionism Rejects “labor/management partnership” schemes Focuses on the day to day resistance to management in the shop and works to build in-shop organization Sees agreements with employers as temporary truces in the class struggle Proposes worker leadership of struggles In contrasting the labor liberalism of recent decades to the older form of business unionism, Burns notes the strong labor liberal orientation to electoral politics. Faced with the highly diverse workforce today, labor liberalism takes a more progressive stance on social questions, such as opposition to racism and defense of LGBT rights. Although labor liberals will sometimes pursue confrontational tactics to force employers to negotiate, they downplay the importance of worker militancy. They seek to limit the level of conflict with employers to avoid a rupture in the on-going relationships between officials and management. Labor liberalism has been associated with publicity “strikes.” An example would be a “strike” picket I attended at a Walmart with activists from various organizations while the workforce continued to work as usual. The action was organized by a non-profit, working with the staff-driven UFCW Local 5. The staff-directed na…
