---
title: "The Chinese Work-Study Movement in France"
author: "Paul Bailey"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/paul-bailey-the-chinese-work-study-movement-in-france"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The China Quarterly, 115, pp. 441–461. Retrieved on 22nd April 2021 from doi.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "paul-bailey-the-chinese-work-study-movement-in-france.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/paul-bailey-the-chinese-work-study-movement-in-france.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Origins of the Movement        Frugal Study in France        The Promotion of Work-Study        Perceptions of Work-Study        Politicization of Work-Study Students and the End of the Movement In 1920 Wang Guangqi (1892–1936), a founder member of the Young China Association (Shaonian Zhongguo Xuehui) in 1918, [1] wrote that in the past few years a clear division had arisen among Chinese overseas students. Those studying in the United States, having been influenced by the philosophy of “worshipping money” ( baijin zhuyi ) wanted to build a “capitalist” China on the American model when they returned. The work-study students in France, however, were concerned with practical training and participation in the labouring world. While Chinese students in the United States received regular government scholarships and enjoyed material comforts, Wang continued, those in France spent their time “sweating and working in factories.” Since the former sought their models in the “oil barons”while the latter looked to the workers for inspiration, Wang concluded, it was inevitable that whereas students returning from the United States would be capitalists, work-study students returning from France would promote “labourism” ( laodong zhuyi ) and become part of the labouring classes. [2] Wang was referring to the more than 1,500 Chinese students who went to France on a work-study scheme between 1919 and 1921. The episode has attracted attention principally because many future Chinese Communist and government leaders were among those students, including Zhou Enlai, Deng Xiaoping, Chen Yi, Li Fuchun,Nie Rongzhen, Li Lisan, Cai Chang, Xu Teli and Li Weihan, as well as famous communist “martyrs” such as Cai Hesen (1890–1931), Xiang Jingyu (1895–1928), Zhao Shiyan (1900–1927) and Wang Ruofei (1896–1946). [3] It was while in France that many Chinese students first became acquainted with, and converted to, Marxism, and in 1922 the Chinese Communist Youth Party in Europe (Lu’ou Zhongguo Shaonian Gongchandang) was founded in Paris. It was also during their sojourn in France that many Chinese students participated for the first time in organized demonstrations against western encroachment in China. [4] Recently, several volumes of materials on the work-study movement have been published in China, [5] and although one might link their appearance with the fact that Deng Xiaoping was a participant, [6] the publication of these materials is perhaps more to be seen as part of the continuing process of emphasizing the importance of Zhou Enlai’s role in the Chinese Communist movement. [7] Although the work-study movement has thus attracted attention primarily because future Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leaders were among the students,the episode deserves to be placed in a wider context. This article will trace the origins of the movement and relate it to the educational thought of the period. It will also analyse the expectations held of the movement by its Chinese promoters, the French authorities and the students themselves, and seek to explain why the movement was ended. A combination of economic circumstances, increasing “politicization” of work-study students, and changing priorities on the partof the movement’s promoters and of the French authorities led to a winding down of the scheme in 1921 amid bitter acrimony between the students and the original promoters. The founder of the work-study movement was Li Shizeng (1881–1973), the son of Li Hongcao, a Grand Councillor and one-time tutor to the Tongzhi Emperor. [8] In 1902 Li had the chance to study abroad when he accompanied Sun Baoqi, the newly-appointed Chinese minister to France, as an “embassy student” ( suiyuan xuesheng ). [9] With Li went his friend Zhang Jingjiang (1877–1950),who came from a family of wealthy silk merchants and who was to serve for a time as commercial attache at the Paris consulate. [10] Another student who was attached to Sun Baoqi’s mission was Chen Lu (1876–1939), who w…
