---
title: "Coronavirus Stories"
author: "Adam Weaver"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/adam-weaver-coronavirus-stories"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Crisis, Response, Resistance"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "adam-weaver-coronavirus-stories.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/adam-weaver-coronavirus-stories.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Chrysanthe, Los Angeles        Lynn, Rochester, NY        Greg, Detroit, MI        Eli M, Durham, NC        Luz Sierra, Miami, FL        John Slavin, Richmond, VA        Kara, Seattle, WA        Antonio, Boston, MA We include here personal accounts from members and allies of Black Rose/Rosa Negra across the U.S. speaking on the direct impacts and responses to the coronavirus crisis underway. Some have been directly affected as healthcare workers, laid off service workers, or having to undergo self-quarantine. Others are on front the lines of the responses through organizing tenants or mutual-aid efforts. So far five of the dozen neighborhood based chapters of the Los Angeles Tenants Union (LATU), including the Vermont Beverly chapter that I organize with, have endorsed a list of demands which includes an immediate moratorium on evictions, an immediate suspension of rent collection, demand for housing to the unhoused, and suspension of ICE enforcement. The demands originated last week when the Hollywood chapter drafting a statement responding to the situation with other chapters signing on and suggesting amendments. Local chapters are assessing the current and projected impact on members and community, such employment, evictions, food, medical care access, isolations, and general well being. In my chapter each organizer is following up with the tenant associations and members that they’ve worked with. I work in an auto parts plant that’s organized with the UAW or United Auto Workers union and I’m a former steward and last year was active with the strike auto worker at my plant. Last week the governor ordered that 50–75% of the workforce needed to stay home and the day the plant manager sent out a letter saying our plant would stay open until the 27 th [of March]. I was at home self-quarantining because I had recently travelled abroad so I started posting in our plant’s Facebook group about taking action and I posted articles about wildcat walks out that were happening in other UAW plants. On other union Facebook pages I saw that whole departments were announcing they were walking out. People were of course pissed and started commenting in the Facebook group while on shift. We also started calling local media and politicians to see if that might add the pressure. Management rolled over and announced the plant closure within three hours! I work in a restaurant at one of the local hotels. Before each shift, the managers hold a meeting with staff to give us information about the night’s food and drink specials and reservations. When panic around the coronavirus started escalating, upper management attended one of these meetings and let us know that at the end of the week, the hotel was going to be closing until early April. They were having meetings with our union reps (HERE) and had come to an agreement that we would get paid for the first week off, since the schedule was already posted but everything else was up in the air. The next day, my wife was discussing with other tenants in the laundry room all of our losses of income and how that would affect our ability to pay rent and other bills. She had looked up our house on Zillow and found that the rent our landlord collects in one year is more than the total cost of what he paid for the house in 2013. So in the seven years he’s owned this property, he has collected 9 times what he paid for it through our rent and the value of the home has increased by more than $150,000. He definitely hasn’t put that much money into repairs and we are responsible for raking the leaves, cutting the grass and shoveling the snow. We are working on a plan to petition him with the other folks who live in our house, and possibly working out a strategy to speak with other people who rent from this same landlord to see if they’d be interested in joining us. A few days later, we got word that the union had negotiated with hotel management that we would be continuing to get paid based on the hours w…
