---
title: "Because I Wanted To"
author: "Kaneko Fumiko, Max Res"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/max-res-kaneko-fumiko-because-i-wanted-to"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "KANEKO FUMIKO on nihilism and why she wanted to kill the Emperor of Japan"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "max-res-kaneko-fumiko-because-i-wanted-to.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/max-res-kaneko-fumiko-because-i-wanted-to.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        November 22, 1923        May 14 th 1925        July 18 th 1925        Works Cited Kaneko Fumiko (1903–1926) was a Japanese anarchist living at the early part of the 20 th century. Born out of wedlock into grinding poverty, she lived her life as an outsider within Japanese society including a stint with unloving and cruel relatives in then-occupied Korea, her experiences inspiring both her rebellion against authority and feelings of solidarity with others on the receiving end of society’s boot. Together with her friend, partner and, before her death, husband Pak Yol, she started underground anarchist societies, published articles against the Japanese state and society, and, perhaps, planned to kill the Emperor Taisho and then-Crown Prince Hirohito with explosives at Hirohito’s wedding. She and Pak were some of of many who’d be swept up in the mass arrests and killings of enemies of the state both real and perceived after the Great Kanto Earthquake of 1923. Placed into “protective custody,” she and Pak were tried and sentenced to death for high treason on charges related to a plot to kill the Emperor and Crown Prince. While these sentences was later commuted to life in prison by the Emperor, an honor she promptly rejected by tearing the decree up in front of her jailers, she was found hanging in her cell in 1926 and is supposed to have committed suicide. These interrogation transcripts provide a valuable look into the thoughts and deeds of Fumiko beyond the time of her youth detailed in The Prison Memoirs of a Japanese Woman, a memoir written during her trial. At points we see her discussing her philosophies of nihilism and individualism, and Stirner peeks through in her protest against the “phantasm” of Confucian altruism and insistence that we should be the center of all things. Her denunciation of the Emperor and the Japanese state is stirring as well, though the substance of the assassination plot which features heavily in the second interrogation included here is rather unclear because, as Helene Bowen Raddeker observes, during her interrogations she’d inflated her role in the matter to make herself appear more guilty and thus be sentenced as harshly as Pak. Though she talks about Pak’s failed attempt to procure explosives in Korea for her in the first interview featured here from 1925, she later admitted in 1926 to finding out about Pak’s attempt only after he returned [1] . Nevertheless, she treated her interrogators to a riposte of the Emperor system fierce enough to keep her in prison even after this admission. This pamphlet includes three interrogations: the first is excerpted from Hane Mikiso’s Reflections on the Way to the Gallows and includes her narrative about how she arrived at her nihilist philosophy as well as a denunciation of the emperor system; the second and third pieces, an original translation by myself, take place two years later than the first and were excerpted by Kurihara Yasushi in his compilation of Japanese anarchist writings, Kurizake, Freedom . These include more robust denunciations of the Emperor and Japanese society. Beyond these there exists a comprehensive transcript of Fumiko and Pak’s trials, correspondences and interrogations in court records which have also been published but are currently out of my reach. Some of their pre-trial writings are also extant, though in limited number, and virtually all of this with the exception of Fumiko’s Prison Memoirs of a Japanese Woman remains as-yet untranslated. In addition to Memoirs , English-language resources for further information about Fumiko include the aforementioned Reflections on the Way to the Gallows , which has a short profile as well as a translation of her essay Nani ga watashi wo kou saseta ka? ( What made me do what I did ). Radikker’s Treacherous Women of Imperial Japan relates and analyzes the stories of both Fumiko and Kanno Suga, a Japanese anarchist executed for treason 15 years before, and includes a…
