---
title: "Anarchism"
author: "H. W."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/h-w-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Free Society 10b no. 18 (May 10, 1904): 2. https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/anarchist-beginnings/h-w-anarchism-1904-2/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "h-w-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/h-w-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Anarchism aims to establish an ideal state of society based on the “golden rule,” in which all distinctions of castes and privileges are abolished, and in which each individual is expected to labor spontaneously for the welfare of himself and the community. Mutual interests and due respect for each other are the only forces deemed necessary in their social relationship, i. e., each will be a law unto himself. Admitting that such a society could not be inaugurated under the present state of affairs, its advocates are endeavoring to awaken the people to the fact that government creates disorder, and that freedom is the remedy, in which humanitarian work they are greatly handicapped by the misrepresentations of a mercenary press. Yet, despite its defamations, the scales are gradually falling off the eyes of the intelligent people, who are beginning to recognize the merits of a society which has only the welfare of mankind at heart; and it is only a question of time when the multitude will “evolute” into the full light of reason and justice. In property as such, Anarchism sees the greatest source of evil, strife and corruption. All governments protect individuals and corporations in the unlimited accumulation of property at the expense of the mass of the toilers, thus fostering greed and avarice and arousing ambitions which lead to wars for personal and national aggrandizement, regardless of the misery it entails upon the people. Recognizing the evil of unrestrained accumulation and monopolization of wealth, as exemplified in the constantly increasing demoralization of society as at present instituted, Anarchism repudiates property in land and natural resources, as well as ownership of the means of production, i. e., such as are not required for the needs and comforts of the individual. In this sense, Proudhon, the founder of Anarchism, declared that “property is robbery.” A person can occupy only one house, can sleep only in one bed, etc., etc., hence in a free society there is no incentive to accumulate things and withhold them from others. And with the incentive gone, temptation disappears, and with it nine-tenths of all the crimes now perpetrated in civilized countries. By holding more than any one requires for his own necessities, he robs others of what they may be in need of. The most essential transformation, then, which society will have to undergo before the ideal state is attained, is the abolishment of all legalized property, society recognizing the right of such property as one requires for his own use. In short, monopoly must cease, and the individual be free to produce and consume as he sees fit, each performing such labor as he or she is best adapted for. Education is the means thru which this ideal state is to be attained. Once property and its prop—government— are abolished, the temptation for wrongdoing, such as stealing, exploiting each other, etc., etc., will cease and the necessity for government terminates. There is nothing visionary or Utopian in such an ideal state of society. It is due to the fatal mistake of our forefathers, who sanctioned the unlimited accumulation of lands and chattels, and protected the holders in their possession, that strife and warfare has been the lot of man. But for this almost irretrievable error, the very aims and objects sought for by Anarchism would have been established long ere this and be in vogue now. There will always be different factions in the fields of science and philosophy unless some ground is discovered “upon which all branches may converge as from their common root,” to paraphrase one of Herbert Spencer’s ban mots. Yet a failure to discover such converging point would by no means be an obstacle to an ideal state of society. Science and philosophy have never alienated brothers; have never shed a drop of blood, and will give zest to life when man is free to act as he was by nature designed to do. Philosophy, however, should not be confounded with religion, its ally…
