---
title: "Deconstructing Myths Surrounding Veganism & People of Color"
author: "Sarambi"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sarambi-deconstructing-myths-surrounding-veganism-people-of-color"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved from https://warzonedistro.noblogs.org/files/2017/09/My-Vegan-Edge-is-Anything-but-White.pdf"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sarambi-deconstructing-myths-surrounding-veganism-people-of-color.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sarambi-deconstructing-myths-surrounding-veganism-people-of-color.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Veganism is a white privileged consumer activity.        Veganism is a form of colonialism because anti-speciesism is a Western concept.        Animal liberation isnt revolutionary and has nothing to do with anarchy.        There is nothing wrong with hunting- indigenous people did it for years.        Pre-colonial Native diets were primarily animal based.        Veganism is a classist movement because vegan food is expensive and unattainable in poor communities.        Hunting and gathering is a form of anti-colonial resistance, therefore veganism can not be a form of anti-colonization. Aight, so I hear this and see this shit a lot. That vegans are inherently white, that veganism is about consumerism, and it also makes the (racist) assumption that ALL POC people have the same, monolithic culture around consuming and exploiting animals. Does the average Western vegan have access to expensive, fancy options? Yes, but so do all consumers, especially those who prefer “natural”, “happy”, “healthy”, and “organic” animal products. And when you don’t? Well, you’re getting by on what is affordable, calorie dense, nutritionally balanced as much as feasible, kinda like we all do when we are forced into poverty. It ain’t new that food and class go together — it literally has been like this since hierarchies and the foundation of many stratified societies that your “worth” is translated to diet. Anyway, there is also the wide array of class backgrounds within the vegan POC community, though most, as you can guess cuz society, are making far less than the Western white vegan trope. And they’re doing fine as they are acting in resistance to consumerism pushing the racist settler narrative that all POC eat a certain way and always have. No, we are and always have been has varied and different as the plant and animal nations*. Don’t be lazily keeping a narrative that white people gave you to separate our relationship to plants and animals. Hang on, so Western Europeans roll up on all our lands, say its theirs cuz flags, enslave/“reform”/kill us, and start desolating land which kills and hurts our relations for centuries and being against that destruction of other living nonhuman relations is theirs? It’s their concept insomuch as they have actively created speciesism we all know of today. The understanding my people have had about nonhuman animals is that they are no different than humans, they share the fact that they are protected by spirits as we are, or they themselves are important figures or representatives to things beyond our own perceptual world. The respect and realization of the fact we are no different than other animals, and we are related and should be treated as such has been a very indigenous understanding as we understand it for the land and waters too. Colonizers have mostly successfully broken these connections and understandings by force on purpose, and have turned all facets of the land, water, and living beings into property instead of honored and related dynamic lives. So actually your speciesism is colonial as fuck. How is disrupting one of the largest exploitative, capitalist, racist, colonial systems not qualify as revolutionary? Please read the history and the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act in full and then talk to me how it’s a non issue to attack. Just like how reforms and social justice ain’t gonna get us total freedom, veganism alone as western green consumerism ain’t gonna do shit either. Which is why green anarchists, anti civ types, and generally very militant folx have been on some of the most destructive, economically and psychologically damaging attacks done. Where I primarily grew up here in the PNW a large, profitable luxury fur trade was shut down because of attacks by folx on some anticapitalist, anticolonial, antispeciesist shit. This is the type of terror authoritarians, capital, and protectors of these institutions need if we as people known colloquially as anarchists are gonna be the most e…
