---
title: "Bashing the Black Bloc?"
author: "Ray Cunningham"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ray-cunningham-bashing-the-black-bloc"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This page is from Red &amp; Black Revolution (no 6, Winter 2002). Republished in The Northeastern Anarchist Issue #4, Spring/Summer 2002. Retrieved on 8th August 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ray-cunningham-bashing-the-black-bloc.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ray-cunningham-bashing-the-black-bloc.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We believe that part of the purpose of this magazine is to address issues that anarchists may find controversial. This essay represents the opinion of one member of the WSM — we hope this will add to the debate, and would like to receive responses from other anarchists. Although the basic idea of the Black bloc has been around for years, it only really entered the public consciousness after the Seattle demonstrations. But after two years of Black Blocs at all the major summit protests, has the Black Bloc tactic reached the end of its usefulness? What role should anarchists play in the anti-globalisation protests? Are they still relevant at all? The four main summits of the last four years — Seattle, Prague, Quebec, and Genoa — have all been different, and the Black Bloc has been different at each one. The Seattle protest, though it involved far fewer people than some of the later protests, was probably the most effective. Because it was the first protest of its kind the police and the summit organizers weren’t prepared, and protestors were able to block access to the summit for most of the day, causing major disruption. The Black Bloc played a relatively small part in the blockade, but received a major part of the news coverage. The two types of action — blockades and property destruction — pointed to a new kind of protest, protest that was visible, illegal, and more concerned with getting results than with making a symbolic point. Since Seattle, summit organizers have been more prepared, and they know that they’ll have to deal with protests, so each summit has seen an increased level of security. In Prague, all entrances to the summit were guarded by the police, making it impossible for the protestors to mount an effective blockade. Different sections of the protest had different reactions. One group, the Pinks, marched around the conference center, and didn’t try to breach the perimeter (though they did enter the summit area when they found an unguarded section). Another, the Yellows, were led by Ya Basta, and chose to take symbolic action. Their attempt to simply push their way through the police lines could never succeed, but was intended to show that they were going beyond simply passive demonstrations. The third block, the Blue block, wanted to take more direct action, and tried to punch through the police lines to get to the summit, or at least the subway station that would be transporting the delegates, blockading them inside the conference center. In their willingness to destroy property, and actually fight the police, this group consciously thought of themselves as an anarchist Black Bloc. In Quebec, the level of security increased again, and again the situation changed. The erection of the perimeter fence, and the raids on squats in the days before the summit, raised the stakes even higher. Like in Prague, the protestors responded by dividing the protest area into zones, so people could choose the level of illegality and confrontation with which they were comfortable. Here, as in Seattle, there was a separate Black Bloc, though unlike in Seattle this Black Bloc concentrated on attacking the summit, confronting police and trying to get through the perimeter fence. Most recently, the Genovese protests, on the day of direct action at least, operated on the understanding that different tactics would be used by different groups of protestors, each in different areas. Although poor advance co-ordination was a factor, the major problem protestors faced in Genoa was the large, and very active, police presence. As well as having formidable perimeter fencing, the police attacked the protestors on their way to the perimeter, stopping some groups from getting near the fence and forcing other elements of the protest together. The Black Bloc, which intended to try to break into the summit, ended up destroying banks and shops in the streets of Genoa. With every summit, with every escalation of security, the conditions that made Se…
