---
title: "About the elections on January 25th and the coalition of SYRIZA and ANEL"
author: "Nikos Maziotis"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nikos-maziotis-about-the-elections-on-january-25th-and-the-coalition-of-syriza-and-anel"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=19025&gt;. Retrieved on 19/07/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nikos-maziotis-about-the-elections-on-january-25th-and-the-coalition-of-syriza-and-anel.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nikos-maziotis-about-the-elections-on-january-25th-and-the-coalition-of-syriza-and-anel.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The January 25 elections was one more “triumph” of civil democracy. It was further proof of the discrediting of a rotten political system, where more than 1/3 of the electoral body turned its back on the “fiesta” of democracy and did not go to vote. Out of the approximately 9.800.000 voters registered in the electoral records participation was at 63,5%, meaning that the valid votes were about 6.180.000, while the other 3.620.000, which accounts for 36,5%, did not go to vote. Out of those who voted, SYRIZA got 36%, i.e. around 2.200.000 voters, meaning that out of all the registered voters, SYRIZA’s government was based on less than 1/4 of the electoral body. A triumph therefore of “popular dominance” and democratic centralization! In the end it’s not the majority through representatives that “governs” as is supposed, but the minority. It has been proved yet again that the political system of civil parliamentarianism is disparaged by millions of citizens. It was proved that precisely because of this disparaging of the political system as a result of the economic crisis, all the governments of recent years are minority governments and that self-reliance is now impossible. In reality, one could say that the main power are those abstaining from electoral illusions and staged circuses of professional liars and fraudsters, right or left. Millions of citizens do not hope for and do not expect anything from any political party. But rage and resentment, when not accompanied by active political action for the subversion of the authority of the supranational economic elite and the civil parliamentarism that supports it, bring no result. We will only ever get rid of the current suffering if the rage and resentment of millions of citizens transforms itself into dynamic political action. Into a wide social and class tendency that places itself the prospect of revolution, the violent and armed subversion of capitalism and the state with a prospect of direct democracy, where instead of people outsourcing social matters to professional politicians they practise it themselves through structures of self-management. As expected, the results of the elections on January 25 brought a coalition government of left and right. Because how else could you define ANEL [ Independent Greek party, the right wing party SYRIZA made a coalition with ], a party that comes from the entrails of the traditional nationalist right wing. It has a far-right agenda, with nationalist and orthodox dogma such as “country-religion-family”, a political line characterised by state authoritarianism, law and order dogma, increased intolerance, fear and conspiracy theory talk and an iron fist attitude against those considered dangerous for the country i.e. immigrants, anarchists, armed fighters. All that is missing are the swastikas. But the SYRIZA people’s thirst for authority as well as that of the ANEL made this weird marriage between left and far-right possible, on the rotten base of a nebulous anti-memorandum block, a marriage never seen before, not only in Greece but also internationally. But the Golden Dawn nazi party is also considered an anti-memorandum party. Contrary to SYRIZA, it is steadfastly against the European Union. An overwhelming majority of its voters are from the area of the traditional nationalist right wing who were disappointed by New Democracy, who until recently expressed the majority of this area and part of which always considered the collaborators and traitors of the (nazi) occupation, the “Chites” [ members of group X, military group that cooperated with the nazis during the occupation of Greece ] and Security Battalion members [ para-military groups that worked closely with the German-Italian forces during the occupation of Greece ] “Greek patriots” who saved the country from communism by making an alliance with the Germans. Many of the voters of ANEL share the same opinion. It is therefore paradoxical that while many, even anarchists, voted for SY…
