---
title: "Anarchism and the Body"
author: "Michelle Campbell"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/michelle-campbell-anarchism-and-the-body"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published in the 2018 issue of Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies. The full issue is available here: https://journals.uvic.ca/index.php/adcs/issue/view/1267 Retrieved on 01/13/2021 from https://journals.uvic.ca/index.php/adcs/article/view/18339"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "michelle-campbell-anarchism-and-the-body.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/michelle-campbell-anarchism-and-the-body.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Works Cited This special edition has its origin story in a conference held at Purdue University in the summer of 2015. Scholarly anarchism still retains a healthy DIY culture, and when I decided many months before that I wanted to get a group of scholars and activists together to talk about anarchism and bodies, all it took was a community and an intellectual hunger. Before I had gotten up the gall to organize a whole conference, I had long wondered: where is the body in our anarchist theory?, how do we account for it?, and how does it figure into our praxis?A motley crew of activists and academics, many of whom consider themselves both, arrived in the heat of the Indiana summer ready to engage in both theory and praxis. The conference program was diverse both in content and approaches. Panels consistedof papers centered on structures of domination and liberation; anarchist publications and cultural artifacts; the laboring body and class organizing; “troubled” reproductions; art, anarchism, and literature; street actions and imprisonment; anarchism and modern humanity; and anarchist theology. There were also roundtables and workshops on anarchist pedagogy, surveillance security, and bodily health and safety during militant actions. I can honestly say I have never attended a conference where, in the same afternoon, I learned about nineteenth-century South American free love, and thenI learned how to wash chemical deterrents out of eyes during a street action. Nor have I ever been to a conference—or anywhere, really—where a woman felt comfortable enough tobreastfeed her child during the middle of her talk without skipping a beat. It was a rupture in time and space that we all needed. I went into organizing this conference with the knowledge that very few contemporary anarchist scholars connect anarchism and the body except through sexuality or sexual experience, often through the domain of gender studies. Although my own research is grounded in gender studies, I wondered what I was missing by viewing the body only through that particular lens, especially as an anarchist scholar. Do contemporary anarchist scholars examine the possibilities of our minds? Yes. The ethics of our souls? Certainly. I wondered: what weren’t we saying about the bodies we lived in and through? How do anarchist activists, theorists, and educators think, act, and exist bodily with themselves and with others? The original call for papers illustrates some of these concerns: “This conference seeks to be the first of its kind that is dedicated to questions of anarchism in conjunction with questions about the body conceived of as real, social, perceived, constructed, or institutionalized. [...] We encourage innovative papers that engage with multiple aspects of anarchism intersecting with multiple disciplines and fields.” We were certainly not the first to wonder or write on these questions. Classical anarchist feminists like Voltairine de Cleyre and Emma Goldman linked the female body to patriarchal and state domination through labor and marriage in the late nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies. In her essay “Sex Slavery,” de Cleyre writes, “Let Woman ask herself, “Why am I the slave of Man? Why is my brain said not to be the equal of his brain? Why is my work not paid equally with his? Why must my body be controlled by my husband?” (2016: 348–9). Indeed, for de Cleyre, the domination of the mind and the body are of equal importance: “These two things, the mind domination of the Church, and the body domination of the State are the causes of sex slavery” (2016: 352). Likewise, Emma Goldman links marriage and capitalism in her essay,“Marriage and Love” because they are both institutions that poison the body (1910: 241). Similarly, in her definitive essay “Anarchism: What It Stands For,” Goldman explains, “Real wealth consists in things ofutility and beauty, in things that help to create strong, beautiful bodies and surroundings inspiring to live in” (1…
