---
title: "Anarchism in Japan"
author: "Hélène Bowen Raddeker"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/helene-bowen-raddeker-anarchism-in-japan"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Raddeker, Hélène Bowen. “Anarchism, Japan.” In The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest: 1500 to the Present, edited by Immanuel Ness, 133–135. Vol. 1. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "helene-bowen-raddeker-anarchism-in-japan.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/helene-bowen-raddeker-anarchism-in-japan.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       References And Suggested Readings Japan has unique traditions of what may be termed “anarchism” rooted in the cultural distinctiveness of the society. Some early twentieth-century anarchists pointed to the horizontal features of village communalism in Japan’s Tokugawa era (1600–1867), while others claim Andō Shōeki, an eighteenth-century doctor, as an anarchist forbear. For Andō, all traditional thought in Japan was mere ideology, an excuse to rob the people. Though he was himself a samurai, Andō saw the samurai ruling class as parasites living off the proverbial sweat of peasant labor and felt that all should engage in “direct cultivation,” coupled with what we might call mutual aid. He contested the antimony of high and low in traditional thinking that had informed “unnatural” and oppressive social relations, including hierarchical relationships between the sexes. It was fitting, then, that in 1908 the early socialist paper Nihon Heimin Shimbun (Japan Commoners’ News) described Andō as a Japanese “anarchist.” This followed what historians refer to as the beginning of Japan’s anarchist movement – setting up of a “direct action” faction in 1907 after a speech given to the Commoners’ Society by Kōtoku Shūsui (1871–1911). The speech was concerned with “The Change in [his] Thought” – to anarchist communism. While visiting comrades in the United States, Kōtoku had written to leading theorist Peter Kropotkin, who willingly gave him permission to translate some of his works into Japanese. In prewar Japan the anarchist movement went in cycles. It was predominantly anarchocommunist at first, then increasingly syndicalist through the teens to the mid-twenties. Under the leadership of Hatta Shūzō (1886–1934) and Iwasa Sakutarō (1879–1967), there was then a swing back to “pure” anarchism (anarchocommunism) which, unlike syndicalism, was seen to be unadulterated by Marxism. The pure anarchists were suspicious of the leading revolutionary role accorded the industrial proletariat by Marxists and syndicalists and saw the practice of “class struggle” in labor unions as essentially capitalist. Membership figures for the anarchist and Bolshevik labor federations throw doubt on the common assumption of historians that anarchism’s influence on radical movements was eclipsed by that of Marxism-Leninism in the mid-1920s. The anarchists opposed what they saw to be authoritarian centralism in both social democratic and Bolshevik organization and demanded local union autonomy. Hence, an “ana-boru” split came to a head in 1925, at which time the Bolshevik labor council (Hyōgikai) had 12,500 members in 32 unions compared to the anarchists’ 25 in 1926, though one anarchist source gives a figure of 29 anarchist unions by 1928. In 1928, when there was a split in the anarchist federation and 3,000 anarchosyndicalists withdrew, the now anarchocommunist federation claimed 16,300 members. The anarchist wing of the peasant and arts movements was led by the Nōmin Jichi Kai (Peasants’ Self-Governing League), which claimed 243 branches and 6,300 members in 1927. In addition, 26 anarchist authors established their own “Literary Front” after being removed from the Marxist-Leninist “proletarian” literary federation in 1926. Amongst the women associated with it was the anarchocommunist Takamure Itsue (1894–1964). Two magazines were produced by anarchist women between 1928 and 1931, Nyonin Geijutsu (Women’s Arts) and Fujin Sensen (Women’s Front), to which some Marxists also contributed. Of course, not all Japanese anarchists identified with only one stream of anarchist thought. By the 1920s some were expressing sympathy for “nihilism” or “egoism,” which was partly indebted to individualistic anarchism. Nietzsche was popular; Max Stirner’s The Ego and Its Own had also been translated into Japanese. The latter’s influence can be seen in the writings of the leading anarchosyndicalist Ōsugi Sakae (1885–1923). Also a fan of Stirner was Itō Noe (1895–1923), a former B…
