---
title: "Anarchists Confront the Marxist State in Cuba"
author: "Quincy B. Thorn"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/quincy-b-thorn-anarchists-confront-the-marxist-state-in-cuba"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Whee! Airbnb announces 2000 available Cuban listings; The New York Times has full page ads for travel to the island. Isn't it all grand? Well, no."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "quincy-b-thorn-anarchists-confront-the-marxist-state-in-cuba.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/quincy-b-thorn-anarchists-confront-the-marxist-state-in-cuba.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Related        Related The recent loosening of restrictions on economic transactions between citizens and companies in the U.S. and those in Cuba has been greeted by many liberals and leftists as a promise of what they designate as “prosperity” for the island. They are hopeful that Congress will eliminate remaining trade restrictions, thereby helping to promote economic growth. However, given past examples of such liberalization, we can only realistically expect it to promote further integration of the Cuban economy into global capitalism. Since shortly after taking power, the Castro regime has fairly systematically repressed anarchist activity. However, beginning in 2010, anarchist-inspired public activities have re-emerged in Cuba. The Alfredo Lopez Libertarian Workshop (Taller Libertario Alfredo Lopez) has brought anarchists together, providing a meeting place for dialogue, mutual learning, rescuing hidden and forgotten histories, and coordination of public activities. (See the site observatoriocriticocuba.org for details.) This year, the Workshop, along with other organizations, sponsored a second Havana Libertarian Spring to commemorate the Haymarket martyrs and Cuban anarchists of the 20th century. Since the 19th century, anarchists have continually faced repression, not only by traditional defenders of the capitalist order–employers, police, military and other government authorities–but also those forces posing as alternatives to the old world. Whether in power or aspiring to it, actors of the authoritarian left, from Marx on, have done everything they could to crush the possibilities and ideals of liberation ardently pursued by anarchists. The regime established in Cuba in 1959 has not deviated from this tradition. The prevailing mystique surrounding the Castro brothers, Che Guevara and the guerrillas who fought in the mountains against a U.S.-supported right-wing dictatorship in the 1950s has obscured the importance of the country’s anarchist struggles. But it isn’t too late to explore and retell some of that story. As in other parts of Latin America, anarchist movements in Cuba began in the mid-19th century, shortly after those in Europe. From their beginnings they have faced constant persecution, from petty harassment to major crackdowns. Anarchists and anarcho-syndicalist had key roles in Cuban labor struggles, popular education, producer cooperatives and other areas of contestation at least until the 1930s. Between 1903 and 1914, anarchists played important roles in many strikes. During these years, the anarchist movement also created alternative recreational and cultural facilities, medical clinics, housing, and producer and consumer cooperatives. Hundreds of thousands of Cubans were involved in these projects. From the 1930s on, the Cuban anarchists experienced increasing repression. In the 1950s, many of them became actively involved in struggles against the military dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, and, like most people, they celebrated its ouster in 1959 by the guerrilla insurgency led by Fidel Castro. At first, many anarchists had a hopeful attitude toward the new regime, while not completely trusting it. Toward the end of the regime’s first year in power, they began to lose hope as activities of independent labor unions and cooperatives were repressed and all criticism of the government started being labeled “counterrevolutionary.” At the same time, the Castro regime began an intensive campaign to gain the support of leftist oppositional tendencies and organizations in other countries. One person who facilitated this endeavor was Manuel Gaona Sousa, Secretary for International Relations in the Asociación Libertaria de Cuba (ALC), an important anarchist organization. Gaona enthusiastically supported the guerrilla insurgency and went on to support the new government. In his position with the ALC, he was in charge of maintaining contacts with anarchist groups throughout the world, enabling him to clai…
