---
title: "Feminism in Turkey"
author: "Mine Ege"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mine-ege-feminism-in-turkey"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on June 25, 2012 from flag.blackened.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mine-ege-feminism-in-turkey.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mine-ege-feminism-in-turkey.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Turkey of the 1960s and 1970s        Feminism in the 1980s        The Other World        Women on the Streets        Feminism in the 1990s        “No Votes Thank You” IN STUDYING the women’s liberation movement and feminism in Turkey, it is worthwhile to browse through the recent past. Why did feminism materialise in Turkey in the 1980s and not in the 1960s when the second fad of feminism rose in the West? In trying to answer these questions, I shall elaborate more on the political developments as far as the nature of the article allows me. I shall also look at the main changes in the women’s movement of the 1990s in relation to the past. The women’s movement in Turkey has, in fact, very deep historical roots. It is known for a fact that at the end of the 19 th century, especially during the Second Constitutional regime period (1908), there were several women’s associations and they published daily papers. During this period when the Ottoman bourgeoisie promoted modernist movements, it would be futile to comment that Ottoman middle class women were unaware of the Suffragette movement influential in the West. Following the National War, the privileges granted to women (Civil Law 1926; the right to vote 1934; equal rights with men in public life 1935) from those in power pursuant to the Kemalist reforms, which were initiated with the establishment of the new state (1923) and which promoted westernisation, had placed women on the same footing in legal terms. The Turkish Women Association with its roots in the women’s movements of the Ottoman period and based on women’s free will, though it was promoted by middle class women, had acknowledged Kemalism because of the rights awarded to women until then by Kemalism. It considered “state feminism” satisfactory and abolished itself to be replaced by certain women’s associations administered directly by the Kemalist state. In other words, educated working women were symbols of modern Turkey for Kemalist republicans. The privileges enjoyed by the middle class women of the Republican period were not enjoyed by women of other classes and sections of the society. Pastoralism and patriarchal relationships were dominant and those who enjoyed these rights in any real sense formed only a small percentage of the urban minority. Naturally, this minority compromised with Kemalism, due to the privileges they acquired, and questioned neither the sexism of Civil Law (man is the head of family; woman is deprived of her rights of inheritance; woman may not work without her husband’s permission; woman who commits adultery is subject to more severe punishments etc.) nor patriarchal relationships. They did not wear the veil and they were “liberated” women who could become pilots, doctors, or teachers. With this point of view, they must have thought that others too would be liberated through secularism, civilisation, education, and westernization on the path Kemalism advised. As a result of all these and as a negative development, the liberal women’s movement that had begun at the Ottoman period and based on the initiative of women ended due to the Kemalist intervention. On the other hand, the privileges Kemalism had awarded, although they were simply granted with no strife, had the following advantage as far as the liberal feminist movement which would develop later on was concerned: the fact that Kemalism, as distinct from other Middle Eastern and Arab countries, granted equal rights to women paved the way for the feminist movement in Turkey, which emerged in the 1980s and enabled the movement to attack patriarchal man-woman relationships and patriarchal establishments directly. This development led feminism in Turkey after the 1980s to formulate a universal language on ideal platforms. The 1968 student movement in the West was a general attack on conventional establishments and institutions including orthodox Marxist organisations, ideology, and institutions, as well as being against the rising n…
