---
title: "Celebrating Independence Day Anew as Anarchists and Libertarians"
author: "Malaginoo"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/malaginoo-celebrating-independence-day-anew-as-anarchists-and-libertarians"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The 12th of June and A New Independence"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "malaginoo-celebrating-independence-day-anew-as-anarchists-and-libertarians.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/malaginoo-celebrating-independence-day-anew-as-anarchists-and-libertarians.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Definition of Independence        An Indictment of the Status Quo        Liberating from the Yoke of Domination        A New Declaration of Independence On the 12 th of June, the Philippine Republic will celebrate Independence Day, on the day Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista declared the existence of a free and independent “Republic Filipina” against the colonial government of the Spanish East Indies in the town of Kawit, Cavite in 1898. Myth and legend has surrounded those events, such as the idea that Aguinaldo read the actual declaration on the balcony of his own house, both patently untrue. However, these stories still circulate, largely because of the prestige and power June 12 holds in the history and consciousness of the people of the Philippines. Of course, history isn’t as simple though. Looking into Independence Day, one can see how this fact inculcated through years of education and myth-making can easily fall through with the smallest amount of research. Independence hasn’t always been celebrated on June 12 for example. Before Macapagal became president, it was celebrated on July 4, to commemorate the end of the Commonwealth in 1946. He meant to signify it to highlight the pinnacle of Philippine independence exemplifying the nation’s role in the “first successful national revolution in Asia since the coming of the West, and the Republic to which it gave birth was the first democratic Republic outside of the Western hemisphere.” Yet a deeper look only presents more questions than answers. If symbolism of the quest for freedom and self-governance is truly the aim of an Independence Day, why shouldn’t the Cry of Balintawak or Pamitinan count, since both could be argued to be the first expression of separation during the Katipunan revolts? Can independence truly be recognized if there were still areas of the country under foreign control? Wouldn’t July 4 be more appropriate, no matter how colonial, since the Republic exercising independence failed and fell during Aguinaldo’s capture at Palanan in 1901? Even so, if the US government continued to impose economic and military influence into the Third Republic and today, can that be truly considered independence? And this line of questioning can be extended further! Because in many ways, it feels like our independence is constantly under threat, and this isn’t just in terms of nation-states and governments, but our independence as people, having the ability to operate freely, associate with one another, express and actualize our views and beliefs. Anyone not living under a rock can see that in a climate of increased repression against dissenters, especially in a situation where many dispossessed are having difficulty trying to make ends meet, if not survive, it would be difficult to say we are “free” or “independent”. It’s easy to say that it has lost all meaning, but if so, what does it really mean? And how can we make sure that we can defend it from threats to its existence, and in extension, ours? Independence is very simple to dissect. It is the state of non-dependence on another entity, having the powers to govern itself and choose its own destiny through their actions. The main connotation of is used to describe territories that gained sovereignty over the land and the people from another entity through war or peace, an example of which is the Philippines. Another way to use independence is for people, usually in the sense that they are not reliant on another person for their finances or decision-making, and are as such largely free to do as they please with their lives and bodies. The opposite of this kind of independence are children who are under their parent’s or guardian’s care or someone that has “utang na loob” to someone (usually a family member or some other patron.) In the Philippine languages, “independence” comes in different forms, from panagwaywayas in Ilokano, katimawan in Kapampangan, katimawaan in Hiligaynon, kasarinlan in Tagalog, kagawasan in…
