---
title: "Against the Law: Anarchist Criminology"
author: "Jeff Ferrell"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-ferrell-against-the-law-anarchist-criminology"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Social Anarchism Issue 25 1998 http://library.nothingness.org/articles/SA/en/display/127"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jeff-ferrell-against-the-law-anarchist-criminology.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-ferrell-against-the-law-anarchist-criminology.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Against the Law: Through the Past, Darkly        Against the Law: The Spiraling Harm of Criminalization and Legal Control        Against the Law: A Note on the Situated Politics of Crime and Resistance        Anarchist Criminology and Anarchist Community        A Footnote on Failure        [[Bibliography]] To live outside the law, you must be honest. -- Dylan, “Absolutely Sweet Marie” Anarchism is an orientation toward social life and social relations that is ultimately no orientation at all. In fact, anarchism might best be thought of as a disorientation ; that is, an approach which openly values fractured, uncertain, and unrealized understandings and practices as the emerging essence of social life. What follows, then, is guaranteed to be an incomplete account of anarchism and anarchist criminology, a failed attempt at orientation. This failure certainly derives from the account’s origins in the work of a single author, and from that author, like others, being caught up in the dementia of deadlines and daily work. But it also derives from the nature of anarchism itself. Like most all theoretical or practical models, anarchism incorporates a variety of limitations and contradictions (Feyerabend 1975). Unlike most other orientations, anarchism acknowledges and celebrates these failings, and doesn’t bother to hide them behind cloaks of absolute certainty or competence. Unlike most modernist intellectual orientations, anarchism and anarchist criminology don’t bother pretending to incorporate reasoned or reasonable critiques of law and legal authority, either. In fact, to the extent that the legal and cultural machinery of the modern nation state, and the accumulated experiences of daily life under such regimes of power, construct “reason” and a sense of what is reasonable, anarchists and anarchist criminologists argue that progressive social change requires the “unreasonable” and the “unthinkable.” In other words, to the degree that reason and “common sense” help keep us locked within present arrangements of authority and power, it seems in our interest to stop making sense, to imagine the unimaginable. Beyond this, as will be seen, anarchists and anarchist criminologists also launch aggressive and “unreasonable” critiques against law and legal authority because they see time and again that such authority undermines human community and constrains human diversity. Unlike some other critical or progressive criminologies, then, anarchist criminology stands not as a careful criticism of criminal justice, a “loyal opposition” to the state and state law. It stands instead as a disloyal and disrespectful (Mazor 1978) attack, a “counterpunch to the belly of authority” (Ferrell 1996: 197). As the Industrial Workers of the World (The Wobblies) — a free-swinging anarchist labor union of the early twentieth century — said: “We are not ‘undesirable citizens.’ We are not citizens at all. We are rebellious slaves....Therefore we are not respectable. We admit it and we are proud of it” ( Industrial Worker 1912:2). In promoting fluid and uncertain social relations, and attacking the sorts of legal authority which stifle them, anarchist criminology aims its disrespectable gaze both high and low. Anarchist criminology arrogantly assaults the structures of state and legal authority ensconced above us; but it also humbly encourages all those below and beyond this authority who invent ways of resisting it, and imagines with them a host of unreasonable and egalitarian alternatives. With H. L. Mencken, anarchist criminology seeks to afflict those comfortable with legal power and privilege, and to comfort those afflicted by its abuses. Anarchist critiques of law and legality, and thus the roots of contemporary anarchist criminology, trace as far as anarchism itself. Early anarchist writers and activists like William Godwin (1756–1836), Max Stirner (1806–1856), Michael Bakunin (1814–1876), and Peter Kropotkin (1842–1921) focused some of their most…
