---
title: "Echoes of the Free Commune of Barbacha"
author: "CrimethInc., Matouf Tarlacrea, Habiba Dhirem-Kasper, Michael Desnivic"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matouf-tarlacrea-echoes-of-the-free-commune-of-barbacha"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Chronicling an Autonomous Uprising in North Africa"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "matouf-tarlacrea-echoes-of-the-free-commune-of-barbacha.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matouf-tarlacrea-echoes-of-the-free-commune-of-barbacha.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Foreword by CrimethInc.        Translators’ Introduction        Echoes of the Free Commune of Barbacha          A Tradition of Insubordination and Autonomy          The Shutdown of the Daïra and Its Replacement by the Open General Assembly          The Autonomy of Struggle and the Struggle for Autonomy          And What if the People’s Assembly Completely Replaced City Hall? The autonomous region of Rojava has gained international visibility as a beacon of struggle against the Islamic State and other forms of autocratic power, an experiment in which many anarchists are currently participating. Yet Rojava is not the only region in which a struggle for self-determination has expanded to open a path towards total liberation. In north Africa, in the region of Kabylia, an ethnic minority oppressed by racism and state oppression has initiated in a series of revolts comparable to what the Kurds have accomplished in Rojava and the Zapatistas in Chiapas. Throughout decades of struggle, they have established zones of autonomy and built bridges to others in revolt, in hopes of bringing about “a genuine emancipatory social revolution.” Read on to learn about this underreported struggle. By Michael Desnivic and Habiba Dhirem-Kasper. This translation has allowed us to share a recent resistance movement that, until now, was completely unknown to English-speaking countries and still largely unknown outside of Algeria. The author, a French writer, filmmaker and documentarian, Matouf Tarlacrea, was very happy to see its release into English. In 2014, he traveled to a commune called Barbacha in northern Algeria with some friends for two days and collected personal stories and documents to present “Échos de la Commune libre de Barbacha” as both an article and short documentary video. Matouf’s specialty is primarily in resistance movements around the world. His grandparents are from northern Algeria and he currently lives in Toulouse, France and is active in supporting CREA ( Campagne de Réquisition, d’Entraide et d’Autogestion or Requisition Campaign for Mutual Aid and Self-Management), a squatted communal building inhabited by people of various ethnic and cultural backgrounds united under one common banner: the total and complete rejection of all authority . Kabylia or Kabylie is a region in northern Algeria just east of the country’s capital city Algiers, inhabited primarily by the indigenous Kabyle people. Outside of Belgium and France, Berbers and Kabyles are fairly unknown to Westerners: Algeria and all of North Africa are imagined to be exclusively populated by Arabs. The Kabyle people are an ethnic division of the Berbers, among many other Berber ethnic groups. Most Kabyles and other Berber ethnic groups currently speak Arabic, Algeria’s official language, as well as regional Berber dialects; French, introduced via colonialism, is also common, especially in business and education. Who are the Berbers? They are the original inhabitants of North Africa (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia) and parts of West Africa (Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, Niger). But they did not call themselves Berbers: like the names of most indigenous peoples (e.g. “Indians”), this name was given to them by invaders. It comes from the Greek word barbarous and the Latin cognate barbarus; root of “barbarian,” originally denoting a person with a primitive civilization. The original inhabitants of this region called themselves Imazighen, which roughly translates to “free people,” known individually as Amazigh (masculine) and as Tamazight (feminine), who speak the Tamazight language. Their land was known as Tamazgha, renamed the “Maghreb” by the Arabs. In Antiquity, the people of this land had close relations with Ancient Greeks and Romans. As with many ancient people, contact with outside cultures alternated between friendship and hostility, with the Berbers playing the roles of both conquerors and conquered. Their contribution to the developing cultures of…
