---
title: "BearHog, and It’s Nihilist Revolt Against Civilization"
author: "Lettuce"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lettuce-bearhog-and-it-s-nihilist-revolt-against-civilization"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Feel free to use edit or do whatever with it. No credit needed. I wrote the story in a style similar to folk stories. So it being shared arround and told half correctly is cool and good with me. No need to ask for permission for anything. Retrieved on 2023-10-26 from raddle.me/wiki/LegendOfBearHog"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lettuce-bearhog-and-it-s-nihilist-revolt-against-civilization.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lettuce-bearhog-and-it-s-nihilist-revolt-against-civilization.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Based on a true story BearHog was hot as hell. The summer heat in southern Georgia was miserable. BearHog was all right because the heat made playing in the mud even more nice. After waking up in the evening, its routine was to wallow in some nice mud, then get a fresh coat of creosote to start the day. BearHog slept amazing today. The night before made BearHog very tired. BearHog ran into a golf course and had lots of room to dig as many holes as BearHog wanted. BearHog was digging on the golf course for grubs to eat for hours. There are not many roots or trees, so BearHog could dig as long or as deep as BearHog wants. BearHog chortles at the joy of having another day of digging, eating, fucking, and running around. All of its favorite activities. BearHog is a nice and fat middle-aged hog, about 400 pounds but can still get away from the hunters plenty fast. BearHog got nice and fat when BearHog was confined in some families backyards who wanted cheaper bacon. Luckily for BearHog, those fools only made the fence 4 feet tall, so once BearHog was grown up, BearHog just climbed it and ran off into the woods. BearHog’s been playing and chilling in the Georgia swamp and woods for a year or two now, having the time of bearHog’s life. BearHog is excited the corn fields are just starting to have some nice ears of corn. Corn is bearHog’s favorite food by far. Its all ways a treat when BearHog finds deer hunters corn bait. As bearHog wallows bearhog grunts to itself reminiscing that great time BearHog saw one of the lumberjacks chopping down bearhog’s woods, fall into a 4 foot hole deep hole Bearhog dug. Or how funny is it to see the big machines break as they fall into the holes BearHog made in fields hunting food to eat. BearHog pays good attention to the farms. Its a great treat when BearHog sees them putting down fertilizer on the cotton fields. BearHog loves eating all the yummy salt. Some time passed, and bearhog went off to a local pond to have some fun swimming. Bearhog has been thinking there have been a lot more unsavory visitors around. It’s easy enough to duck random hunters who only have guns. BearHog can smell them from 25 miles away, so they are easy to dodge. But some of the corn around smells just wrong; on occasionally BearHog had to run off to dodge some bloodhounds; and bearhog has had to dig out from underneath a couple traps it was stuck in. Bearhog has been running deeper into the woods, but BearHog just finds different hunters and traps. And every day, the forest gets smaller and smaller as it is replaced with fields and a bunch of houses. It’s kind of annoying, but whatever. Bearhog gets a big run up to cannonball into the pond. As bear swims around, BearHog sees a pack of pigs who live in the area. But to bearhog’s surprise, BearHog sees the pigs are in great fear. Bearhog jumps out of the water and smells lots of dogs coming, so BearHog starts to run in the opposite direction. BearHog start to hear snarling and growling. BearHog looks over bearHogs shoulder after BearHog sees one of the pig moms start to get mauled by a pitbull. Bang, the other pig gets shot. As the last adult pig is getting mauled, the human starts shoving a piglet into a sack. Bearhog can’t decide what is louder: the squeal of the hogs screaming for their lives, the chuckling of the hunter, or the gnashing of dog teeth. BearHog is deeply ashamed but keeps running. BearHog takes a final look and notices the last of the piglets were spared the bag as they were mauled to death by the dogs. Just like what life was like in the crate, this memory won’t be something that BearHog will get over even with 100 mud baths. BearHog runs with all it’s might deep into the forest. After what feels like forever, Bearhog doesn’t really smell the dogs anymore. Bearhog takes the time to lay down and squeal quietly to itself. Life is fucking shit. Bearhog naps for a bit, but wakes up still depressed. BearHog begrudgingly goes around digging to get some food to e…
