---
title: "Death of a Zapatista"
author: "Levi Gahman"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/levi-gahman-death-of-a-zapatista"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Neoliberalism’s Assault on Indigenous Autonomy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "levi-gahman-death-of-a-zapatista.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/levi-gahman-death-of-a-zapatista.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       …from the mountains of the Mexican Southeast…        ‘ La Realidad’ – The Reality        Indigenous Autonomy        The Zapatista Dream On Friday May 2, 2014 an Indigenous Zapatista teacher, Jose Luis Solís López – known by his name ‘in the struggle’ as ‘Compañero Galeano’ – was ambushed and murdered. He was beaten with rocks and clubs, hacked with a machete, shot in the leg and chest, and as he lay on the ground gasping for air – he was executed by a final bullet to the head. The reason he was subjected to this callous violence varies depending upon what account is heard or read. But in truth, he was assassinated because he was Indigenous, because he was a teacher, because he was humble, and more specifically – because he was a Zapatista. And in a contemporary global system of neoliberal production and colonial governance, people like Galeano are deemed to be threats – threats that need to be killed in cold blood and suffer brutal deaths. The assault on Galeano was also an attempt to antagonize the EZLN (Zapatista Army of National Liberation) into reacting with violence themselves as retribution for the death of one of their promotores de educación (‘promoters of education’ – what teachers are called in the Zapatista system of horizontal education). The provocation was directly aimed at the EZLN in hopes of prompting them into engaging in armed conflict, which would thereby give the Mexican state reason to retaliate and attack Zapatista communities. However, despite the pain and rage that the Zapatistas are feeling, they continue to release statements calling for peace. And amidst the tears, sorrow, indignation, and sadness they now have due to one of their cherished teachers being slain at the hands of a few greedy cowards, they have stated they are not seeking revenge, nor blood, nor vengeance, but rather, they seek justice. In detail, Galeano was viciously murdered by nearly 20 members of differing paramilitary organizations in La Realidad (‘The Reality’), a Zapatista Caracol located in the Lacandon Jungle of Chiapas, Mexico. Once dead, the attackers (who are not part of the Mexican military, nor government, but rather, who are paid under-the-table and given kickbacks for their attempts at fracturing Zapatista communities) drug his body nearly 100 yards, dropped it on the ground, and left it to lay openly exposed. It was at this point that several Zapatista women, widely recognized for their fearlessness, courage, and dignity, went out under the face of further threat to carry Galeano’s body back to shelter. In addition to the murder of Galeano, the paramilitaries injured 15 other unarmed Indigenous Zapatistas, and set about destroying a local school, health clinic, and water system. The attack has been identified by peace observers from the Fray Bartolomé de las Casas Human Rights Center as a premeditated act of unprovoked aggression on the part of those men who carried out the assassination. Given the history of paramilitary activity in the region, as well as the account of a young Zapatista woman who was later verbally taunted, mocked, and bullied by the shooter, the slaying of Galeano can be seen as part of a larger strategy of low-intensity warfare that the federal, state, and local levels of the Mexican government (called the ‘Bad Government’ by the Zapatistas) are waging against the EZLN and its bases of support. The underlying motivations of Galeano’s death, the state sanctioned counterinsurgency, and the militarized surveillance of Indigenous Zapatista communities are complex and multifaceted. In this way, it is important to understand that his assassination was not the result of a single, isolated incident. Rather, Galeano’s murder is part of an ongoing story of over 500 years of imperial conquest, the racist denigration of Indigenous people, the repression of rural peasants, and exploitative processes of accumulation by dispossession. Such socio-political dynamics not only continue to operate within Mexic…
