---
title: "Electoral Struggle and Direct Struggle"
author: "Errico Malatesta"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/errico-malatesta-electoral-struggle-and-direct-struggle"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated from “Lotta elettorale e lotta diretta,” La Questione Sociale (Paterson, New Jersey) 5, new series, no. 15 (December 16, 1899). The Complete Works of Malatesta Vol. IV: Towards Anarchy: Malatesta in America, 1899–1900, edited by Davide Turcato, translated by Paul Sharkey."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "errico-malatesta-electoral-struggle-and-direct-struggle.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/errico-malatesta-electoral-struggle-and-direct-struggle.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The fundamental reason for which we refuse to delegate to others or, given the case, accept legislative roles ourselves, and for which we preach abstention from voting in political and local elections, is the fact that we do not acknowledge that anybody has the right to make laws, and we want the agreement required for the smooth functioning of society to derive, not from the imposition of the few over the many and not even the many over the few, but from the free consent of all those concerned. Consequently, we consider any methods that lead the people to believe that progress consists in a change of governing individuals, and revolution in a change of government form, to be dangerous, and directly counter to our purposes. But this reason, of course, only holds true for anarchists. Others, those who believe in the right of majorities and in the parliamentary system, are right to want people to get used to abandoning their interests to the luck of the ballot box. Besides, the bulk of the dissatisfied public has no interest in matters of principle, they do not think about distant consequences and side-effects, and look only at the direct practical results. By electing good deputies and good council members one can obtain a reduction in taxes, an increase in freedom, laws favoring the workers, etc.—say those who are interested only in immediate improvements. Through elections one might perhaps transform society gradually and peacefully, or, if that cannot be done due to the government’s contrary violence, one can, at any rate, draw closer and facilitate socialism’s triumph, using these elections to make propaganda and agitation, conquering those freedoms that are the necessary tools for educating the people and getting them used to participating in public life, and preparing our people to exercise public office—say the democratic socialists, who aspire to “conquer public powers,” which is to say to enter government. And here and there, when the reaction is most pressing, some anarchists, who want to act and don’t know where to find the means of doing so, or who are weary of the struggle and looking for an honorable way to withdraw, come out to say: “There is no need to be exclusivist, we need to know how to adapt to circumstances. So, in times when persecution denies us the possibility of any sort of activity, it is good to vote—not so much to send anyone to the legislature, but as a way of protesting, on behalf of the convicted and persecuted, to find an opportunity to make propaganda, to let it be known that we are alive and assert ourselves as a party.” And so from an issue of principle, which it fundamentally is, the issue of elections is presented as a mere tactical issue. Well then, let us leave principles aside, let us for a moment disregard the final goal we pursue and consider the issue as a purely tactical one, in view of the improvements that can be immediately obtained, and the gains propaganda can make. We maintain that electoral tactics are an obstacle to potential improvements, and damaging to propaganda and agitation. In assessing the results of their method, the electionists make two mistakes which are at the root of persistent illusions. First, they mistake effect for cause, and attribute to the effectiveness of the electoral struggle and the parliamentary system what little good (oh, how little it is!) at rare times (oh, how rarely!) is done by elected bodies, while this is really the effect of popular pressure, to which the rulers concede what little they think is necessary to calm the people, anesthetize their energy and prevent them from demanding more. Second, they compare what is done in the electoral struggle with what would happen if nothing were done; while instead they should compare the results obtained from the fight at the ballot box against those obtained when other methods are followed, and with what might be achieved if all effort used to send representatives to power, from whom they expect refo…
