---
title: "Anti-Fascism on trial in Germany"
author: "Love and Rage Revolutionary Anarchist Federation, Anonymous"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anti-fascism-on-trial-in-germany"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "1995 Mar/Apr issue of L&amp;R. Retrieved on 2016-06-13 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anti-fascism-on-trial-in-germany.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anti-fascism-on-trial-in-germany.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Big Anti-Antifa Raid        Investigations Against Autonome Antifa (M)        New 129a Investigations        The “Forbidden Art” Exhibition        Subpoenas And Investigations In the fall of 1991, a series of investigations were stared in the German city of Göttingen concerning the law Paragraph 129a (propaganda for, support for, formation of, or membership in a terrorist organization). The reason for these investigations were 52 unsolved anti-fascist “attacks” that had been carried out in the Göttingen region since 1981. The state prosecutor’s office in Celle (GSA) formed a special commission with Lower Saxony’s criminal justice department (LKA), the SoKo 606, which was supposed to “solve” these attacks. It soon became clear that the cops were focusing their investigations on autonomist anti-fascists. In Aug. 1992, the first series of house raids were carried out in connection with the 129a investigations in Göttingen, Osterode, and Berlin. The searches turned up nothing, and no criminal proceedings were launched. Another raid in Nov. 1992 in Ulzen, on the house of an anti-fascist linked to the Göttingen investigations, also failed to produce results. In June 1992, it first was made public that the 129a investigations were directed against the organization Autonome Antifa (M), whose name was continually mentioned in connection with the investigations. On June 5–6, 1994, the GSA-Celle and the LKA let the cat out of the bag. The homes of 17 people charged with being members of Autonome Antifa (M) were raided. The raids were not only carried out in Göttingen, but also in various places in the states of Lower Saxony, Hessen, and North Rhine-Westphalia. The Students Association (AStA) office at Göttingen University was also raided, as was the infoshop ‘Buchladen Rote Strasse,’ a graphic design studio, and a printing shop. A total of 30 searches were carried out, the largest anti-Antifa raid ever in the Federal Republic of Germany. But these raids were no longer concerned with explaining the 52 attacks or claims of the formation of a terrorist organization. The cops were suddenly silent about these accusations. The charges now were based on Paragraph 129 (formation of a criminal organization) and Autonome Antifa (M)‘s violation of public assembly laws. Some of these 129-investigations are also 129a-investigations. Now the claim was also being made that Autonome Antifa (M) were in direct contact with the Red Army Fraction (RAF), which is a pure state propaganda lie. The 129a accusations are largely directed at the spreading of one KuK (‘Kunst und Kampf’, Art and Struggle) poster by alleged members of Autonome Antifa (M). This poster was used to publicize an Autonome Antifa (M) event held on May 6, 1993. Speakers at the event, besides Autonome Antifa (M), included two former RAF—prisoners, Gisela Dutzi and Gunter Sonnenberg, as well as the editors of the newspaper “clockwork 129a.” The poster for the event showed the remains of the Weiterstadt prison that had been blown up by a RAF commando in March of that year. Besides the 129/129a investigations directed against Autonome Antifa (M), there is now also a separate 129a investigation underway against the infoshop ‘Buchladen Rote Strasse’ because they sold a pamphlet entitled “Selected Historical Documents: Federal Republic of Germany—Red Army Fraction,” which was published by GNN-Verlag [a major publisher] and which is now circulating in its 6 th edition, and because the infoshop allegedly sold photocopies of a RAF communique that had already appeared in a nearly complete form in several daily newspapers. In Nov. 1994, the people who run the infoshop were charged with 129a: spreading propaganda for the RAF. Shortly before Christmas 1994, lawyers representing the 17 people charged with membership in Autonome Antifa (M) were sent huge boxes with 31 files from the GSA-Celle. The files showed the massive amount of observation that had been carried out in Göttingen over the last…
