---
title: "Ecology against Capitalism"
author: "Hêlîn Asî"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/helin-asi-ecology-against-capitalism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Seeking a Renewed Relationship to Nature"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "helin-asi-ecology-against-capitalism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/helin-asi-ecology-against-capitalism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Around the world, currently, thousands of people, especially youth, protest and demand action against climate change. Under the slogan Fridays for future global strikes and mass demonstrations took place on March 15 th . In light of the statistics and prognoses about the causes and effects of climate change over the last few years, the climate question has become one of the most urgent questions of our time. While on one side, individuals must bear responsibility, it is clear that it does not suffice to merely criticize individual lifestyles without challenging larger structural political and economic conditions. Analyzing climate change as independent from capitalism means depoliticizing the issue. In fact, nearly all conditions that have contributed to climate change can be traced back to the capitalist-consumerist system. In this sense, ecology will have to go beyond just “protecting the environment”. Instead, a meaningfully ecological approach can lead to profound social, political and economic change and help us develop renewed relationships between humans and nature and humans and society. What is climate change and what are its effects? In short, climate change is an increase of the average temperature on earth resulting from an increased output of so-called greenhouse gases (e.g. carbon dioxide or methane) into the earth atmosphere. While these gases are naturally part of the earth’s atmosphere, through their increased presence the atmosphere turns into a “roof” that preserves the warmth of the sun, a process referred to as the greenhouse effect. Like in a greenhouse, warmth is absorbed on earth through the increased presence of greenhouse gases. These gases are released due to the use of fossil fuels, which are currently the world’s most widely used energy source. Cooking, heating, charging your phone, taking a hot shower, driving a car – these things mostly go back to fossil sources like petroleum or coal. Especially the capitalist, consumerist system needs fossil energy to persist. The production of nearly all industrially-fabricated goods relies on fossil fuels. The increase of the average temperature on earth as a result of these processes does not mean that it suddenly gets hot everywhere. The effects of climate change are much more complex and vary across different regions. Some regions are increasingly hit by heat waves, others by humidity, some by increased precipitation, others by drought. Generally, more natural disasters occur, for example, as a result of rising sea levels, which affect mostly people in coastal areas. Moreover, many animal and plant species and their habitats are endangered. Many animals are or will not be able to adapt to climate change. In sum, the capitalist system continues to exploit nature despite all warning signals and forecasts and to destroy the livelihood not only of humans but of all flora and fauna. Particularly remarkable, and indeed scandalous, is the fact that the effects of climate change especially hit those regions that contributed the least to climate change and that have the least means to adapt to its effects. In the meantime, industrialized capitalist states that are considered to be the “most prepared for climate change” possess the financial means to protect themselves, while doing nothing significant to stop climate change. The capitalist economic system is based on the unlimited exploitation of earth and its beings for the production of ever-more absurd and unnecessary products for the market. This surplus is not meant to cover the basic needs of society or to enhance the life quality of people. On the contrary, this system can only survive on the backs of exploited workers and women and on the basis of extreme injustice towards people in so-called “underdeveloped” countries, whose resources have already been looted and exploited in the 15 th century by Europeans. Capitalism substantially developed on the backs of colonies, workers, women and nature. When we look …
