---
title: "Basic Strategy up to the Transitional Period"
author: "Federazione dei Comunisti Anarchici"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federazione-dei-comunisti-anarchici-basic-strategy-up-to-the-transitional-period"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Basic Strategy Document (Approved by the First Congress of the FdCA, 1985)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "federazione-dei-comunisti-anarchici-basic-strategy-up-to-the-transitional-period.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federazione-dei-comunisti-anarchici-basic-strategy-up-to-the-transitional-period.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I — Introduction        II — On Being an Anarchist Communist          PRIVATE LIFE          AS MUCH COMMUNISM AS POSSIBLE          GRADUALITY        III — Self-management        IV — Relations with other political forces          OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS          OUR ALLIES          OUR ADVERSARIES          OUR ENEMIES Our Theory examines the history of the class struggle which leads us to become Anarchist Communists. The first part of our Basic Strategy analyses our enemies, allowing us to understand what we need to do in order to survive despite the repression which the powers that be use against us, and also to destroy any obstacle which interferes with the realization of Anarchist Communism. We have to establish the principles behind our action. These are not abstract concepts. They originate in the conditions under which we live and work and only if they are shared by all will they unite us and not contradict our practices. Although our practice is of necessity linked to the particular, specific conditions of the time and place where we operate, it must always keep these principles in mind, principles which are the product of an analysis of the historical period we are part of. This, then, is not a programme. It is a correct methodology without which no programme can be considered right or wrong. We will therefore develop our programmes and judge the programmes of others on the basis of this methodology, remembering that every programme must keep in mind the “basic” political situation of our age. These basic principles of our political work did not appear for the first time today as an invention of ours. They are the same principles that Anarchist Communists have acquired and experimented over the course of time, albeit under varying historical conditions. Today, it is our turn to adopt them but we must avoid the mistakes of the past. We must avoid certain principles being used in contradiction with others. We can do this not by eliminating from our practice those methods which did not provide good results in the past, but by attaching (as much as possible) the right importance to each “principle” so that together they can form a more organic whole. Consciousness of Anarchist Communism comes from the consciousness of history. But it is empty unless real individuals adopt it and allow it to take its place in history. Even this is of no value, unless these individuals transmit their consciousness and their existence through their actions and their work. In order for Anarchist Communist consciousness to spread and for Anarchist Communists to grow in number and act, it is first and foremost necessary for us to live Anarchist Communism (its consciousness, physical presence and political action) in the society around us in the least contradictory and most gratifying way possible, as something useful and beautiful. Being an Anarchist Communist in the 21 st century, in a world dominated by wars, capitalism and repression, means being able to imagine a different way of life, with the same productive possibilities as today. A life in which war, violence and social injustice no longer exist. Understanding this means understanding the injustice of this society and fighting to end it. But it also means trying to improve the quality of our lives today as much as possible. There have been those on the one hand, who have been attracted by the ideal of a just society and who felt their lives to be like a christian mission. These people have sacrificed their own lives for the sake of their ideals to such an extent that they have isolated themselves from reality and become the vanguard of a movement of lofty idealists which is invariably short-lived. They have lived on the bread of their idealism and not of the day-to-day social reality, and have distanced themselves bit by bit from the class struggle, ceasing to be a part of it. Then there have been others who, faced with the difficulties of political struggle, have come to the dec…
