---
title: "Atassa"
author: "S., XXV//X, Seminatore, A member of the Momento Mori Nihilist Sect, Hast Hax, Ramon Elani, Lunas de abril, Regresión, John Jacobi, Orkelesh, Abe Cabrera, Anonymous"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-atassa"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Readings in Eco-extremism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-atassa.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-atassa.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Presentation      The Flower Growing Out of the Underworld: An Introduction to Eco-extremism        Conclusion: War with an expiration date, war without end      The spilling of blood on the paths of “absolute truth”      Apostles and Heretics        Introduction        Kaczynski’s Crusade        The Apostles        The Heretics        Final Thoughts      ITS: The Invisible Menace        April [2016] It continues:        May The international target: Incubators of progress        July Silence        August As if it wasn’t clear already: It goes on... even if they take our blog away        September That which doesn’t kills us makes us stronger: that’s a fact        Anti-Conclusion This is not end, it’s just getting started      Sighs      Lessons Left by the Ancients: The Battle of Little Big Horn      The Return of the Warrior        Nothing is more outmoded than the man of war: he has long since been transformed into an entirely different character, the military man.        Throughout his work, Kleist celebrates the war machine...Goethe and Hegel are old men next to Kleist.        The sea as a smooth space is a specific problem of the war machine.        The war machine is the motor of the social machine: the primitive social being relies entirely on war, primitive society cannot survive without war. The more war there is, the less unification there is, and the best enemy of the State is war. Primitive society is society against the State in that it is society-for-war.        Early Islam, a society reduced to the military enterprise.        For ages on end agricultural implements and weapons of war have remained identical.        What the nomads invented was the man-animal-weapon, man-horse-bow assemblage.      Atassa: Lessons of the Creek War (1813–1814)        The Emergence and Shape of Creek Society        The Trade Trap        Tecumseh’s Call to Spiritual Warfare        The Creek Primitivist War        The Massacre at Fort Mims as Re-wilding        Tohopeka        Lessons from the Creek War        Works Cited      The Seris, the Eco-extremists, and Nahualism      (Roma Infernetto-“Shit World”) To Profane and Devour      Regresión #3, Editorial      Indiscriminate Anarchists      Today      Surviving Civilization: Lessons from the Double Lives of Eco-extremists        By way of introduction...        Without raising suspicions        Secure communication        Relations with non-eco-extremists        Always Vigilant, Always Wild        Without conclusion...      To the Mountains      Theodore Kaczynski’s Anti-Tech Revolution: Why and How , A Critical Assessment        Introduction        The Development of a Society Can Never be Subject to Rational Human Control        Why the Technological System will Destroy Itself        III. How to Transform a Society: Errors to Avoid        IV. Strategic Guidelines for an Anti-Tech Movement        Conclusion      The Singing River: A Final Word to the Reluctant Atassa is the Muskogee word for “war club.” The atassa was the symbol of the Red Sticks, a faction within the Muskogee or Creek nation that from 1813 to 1814 fought against the encroachment of white settlers on their lands in what is now the states of Georgia and Alabama in the present-day United States. For us, it is a symbol of a war that came too late, too late to save their sacred ground and rhythm of life, too late to fight the mass of invaders who would transform the land into something unrecognizable. Nevertheless, the war was fought, because their instincts, and arguably the land itself, demanded it. Eco-extremism has no presence in the United States or in the English-speaking world. It started in Mexico as an illegalist tendency, not at all concerned with proselytism or popularity, and has since spread to other countries to the South and in a certain form to Europe. Those involved in this journal are thus not eco-extremists, and we don’t advocate that anyone consider this journal an exhortation to action or advo…
