---
title: "Read On Authority"
author: "JudgeSabo"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judgesabo-read-on-authority"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "How Engels Mocked at the Whole World"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "judgesabo-read-on-authority.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judgesabo-read-on-authority.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judgesabo-read-on-authority)

Socialist Future: Anarchism Combined Action and the “Authority” of Machines

Capitalist Present: Anarchism and the “Authority” of the Revolution

Friedrich Engels’ “ On Authority ” was originally published in December 1873, and even 150 years later, is frequently presented by Marxists as the definitive refutation of anarchism. It’s not hard to see why this essay is popular. It is exceptionally short, being only four pages long. It is not overly technical, and is full of pithy, biting, and easily quotable remarks. It also, ironically, carries a fair amount of authoritative weight itself, being written by Marx’s closest ally, and remained one of the main theoretical sources used for rebuking anarchism elsewhere, such as in Vladimir Lenin’s State and Revolution . In many ways, it set the basic framework for how Marxists are meant to respond to anarchist theory.

For some, “On Authority” is also seen as useful for more duplicitous reasons. As the anarchists are the anti-authoritarians, all non-anarchist position are referred to as authoritarian. Engels very explicitly is defending “authoritarianism,” but in a way that should not be confused with the more common modern usage. In Engels’ framework, even the most democratic government is authoritarian, in contrast to the more narrow meaning today to refer to especially anti-democratic and anti-pluralistic states, like autocracies or military juntas. Given that many self-described Marxist states have been described as “authoritarian” in this later sense, it can be rhetorically useful to spin this accusation in a more positive direction, even if that’s not really the case Engels is making.

“On Authority” therefore tends to attract both good faith actors looking to learn more about Marxism or critiques of anarchism, as well as bad faith actors who do not particularly care to critically examine what Engels said. In either case though, it remains a fairly “beginner” text, apparently not requiring any deep familiarity with the rest of the Marxist corpus. For those who are familiar, it might be dusted off every once in a while when an anarchist is encountered in the wild, but is rarely engaged at anything close to a deep and meaningful level.

On the rare occasion this does happen however, opinions of it tend to be much more negative. Not only does its representation of anarchist thought seem extremely questionable, it even seems to be out of place within Marxism itself. For example, Robert C. Tucker, the historian and editor for The Marx-Engels Reader who translated "On Authority," wrote this in his introduction:

Tucker is right to call out this inconsistency. Whenever Marx or Engels typically describe industry as despotic, it is presented as a direct consequence of capitalism and alienated labor having turned the worker into a “mere appendage” of the machine. Socialism, the emancipation of the proletariat, is meant to fix precisely this issue. For Engels to claim that industry is inherently despotic, and that the worker will continue to be dominated by it even within socialism, sticks out. This tension could easily be missed by someone not familiar with Marxist theory, which tends to be the essay’s exact audience.

For those who are familiar with socialist theory, “On Authority” is generally seen as a fairly marginal text containing little insight at best, and certainly isn’t anything close to a “definitive” rebuke of anarchism, which has had 150 years to formulate a full response. Even compared to the anarchist theory of the time though, it’s not clear it was ever a successful critique. This can be partly seen in Simoun Magsalin’s “ The Question of a Stagnant Marxism: Is Marxism Exegetical or Scientific? ”:

“On Authority” is clearly one of Engels’ weakest texts where the clarity and sharpness of his other texts like Socialism: Utopian and Scientific are markedly absent. Yet terminally online “Marxists” constantly cite it again and again and appeal to its authority as if it is a priori correct simply because Engels wrote it. Any anarchist worth their black banners can demolish the weak foundations on which Engels built “On Authority” and no Marxist who has done the work of engaging with both the Marxist and anarchist canons would cite this weakest of Engels’ texts in critiquing anarchism.

Renato Flores concurs, writing in “ Anarchism and the Necessity of a Modern Critique " that they recognize the need for critiques of anarchism to be updated over a century later:

On the year of the 100 th anniversary of Kronstadt, and a year where anarchists just love to critique Lenin as a bloody counterrevolutionary, we have to recognize that an up-to-date and thorough piece on the failures of anarchism still has to be written. The two texts which we usually use to counteract anarchist tendencies are “On Authority” and “State and Revolution”, but I think they are ultimately unconvincing, especially compared to something like “the tyranny of structurelessness” which points much better at anarchism’s weaknesses.

I intend to critique “On Authority” on both fronts, showing how it not only fails to properly engage anarchist theory, but also becomes problematic for Marxists who wish to endorse it. To do this properly, I will need to explain a fair amount of Marxist and anarchist theory in process.

Preferably this should be done using anarchist works written prior to when “On Authority” was written to see if Engels’ argument was appropriate at the time. However, given how early this was written in the development of anarchist thought, even before the name “anarchist” had stuck, this may be difficult, especially considering that many of these texts have not been translated. It is still useful to compare the essay to later anarchist writings though, given that the essay is used against even present-day anarchists. To help work around this issue, I intend to analyze what early anarchist works I can, and hope I can establish enough points of connection with later anarchist writings to show a level of consistency, especially as these ideas become more refined and jargon is made more standardized. I still intend to focus on relatively early anarchist works though, largely from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

I also hope that, by citing many different works of anarchist theory, readers who might otherwise be unfamiliar with anarchism can learn more about it in the process, and have exposure to several interesting texts where they can discover more.

Briefer refutations of “On Authority” have been published plenty of times in the 150 years since its publication, exposing these central issues. Readers looking for that might do better looking at a source like Section H.4 of the Anarchist FAQ , Piper Tompkin’s “ ‘On Authority’ Revisited ,” or the London Anarchist Federation’s “ The Problems With On Authority .” My hope is to go beyond these by not only debunking Engels’ essay, but also provide a better grasp of anarchism and Marxism. If these refutations have killed it, I am aiming for overkill.

Before we can properly critique Engels’ argument, we need to establish what that argument is. Despite its short length, “On Authority” has been interpreted in wildly different ways. This is partially due to the inherent vagueness of some areas of the essay, and partially due to some attempts at reconciling it with the rest of Marxism. There are also confusions that just inevitably arrive whenever a text becomes overused in online debates. It is something of a meme among online Marxists to spam “Read On Authority” at anarchists.

To both demonstrate my familiarity and good faith reading of the text, as well as to correct any mistaken interpretations, I will present a line-by-line analysis of “On Authority.” Through this process, I hope to clarify certain parts that are frequently misunderstood while also calling attention to other portions that I intend to more fully critique later on. I also hope that, should anyone find genuine issues with my own interpretation of Engels, I will at least have been able to show my work. Perhaps someone with greater knowledge of the total works of Marx and Engels could provide better explanations for these ambiguities than I am able to, and welcome challenges on these points. For the time being, I will instead respond to the interpretations of Engels I have been able to discover and explain why my reading should be seen as more plausible.

The essay should also be understood within its historical context, especially its relationship to the International Workingmen’s Association (IWA), better known as the First International. The IWA was a massive pluralist organization made up of various worker and socialist movements in the 19th century. Marx and Engels held rather powerful positions within the IWA’s General Council, but came into conflict with another member, the Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin, who they believed was conspiring to take over the IWA given his especially strong influence in Switzerland, Spain, and Italy. This conflict culminated in the Hague Congress of 1872 where, through questionable methods, Marx and Engels manufactured a vote to expel Bakunin from the International. [2]

For a more detailed history, I refer any interested readers to Wolfgang Eckhardt’s The First Socialist Schism: Bakunin vs Marx in the International Working Men’s Association (2016). It has been an especially helpful work for finding many primary sources. For a somewhat briefer presentation of this history, I would recommend Robert Graham’s We Do Not Fear Anarchy, We Invoke It: The First International and the Origins of the Anarchist Movement (2015).

Before proceeding, I of course encourage any reader to read “On Authority” themselves, or to even reread it so the argument will be fresh in their minds, and because I intend to reference later parts of the essay as I go through my analysis. It can be read here .

A number of Socialists have latterly launched a regular crusade against what they call the principle of authority. It suffices to tell them that this or that act is authoritarian for it to be condemned. This summary mode of procedure is being abused to such an extent that it has become necessary to look into the matter somewhat more closely.

Engels begins by establishing why this essay is necessary: to combat the rise of anti-authoritarian socialism.

Because the word “anarchist” is not used anywhere in “On Authority,” the occasional reader tends to ask whether this essay is really meant to be about anarchism at all. He only refers to anti-authoritarians or “autonomists.” Having seen the broader context of when it was written, it is clear that he really did have the anarchists in mind. Engels had simply written his essay so early in anarchism’s development that even the name “anarchist” was not yet standardized. Members of this movement would sometimes call themselves anarchists, but they would also refer to themselves as collectivists, federalist, revolutionary socialists, libertarians, or a number of other terms. [4] The name “anarchism” stuck in part, ironically enough, because of Marx and Engels’ frequent habit of labeling them this way, despite not doing so in “On Authority.” [5]

Given all this, I will treat the word “anarchist” as interchangeable anytime Engels discusses the people he is critiquing.

While Marx and Engels disagreed with the anarchists on a number of different issues, Engels believes he is striking at the heart of anarchism itself by challenging their notion of authority. He believes that, if anarchism is correct, then socialists must reject all authority. Against this, he wants to defend some forms of authority as necessary, showing the central principle of anarchism is mistaken.

Authority, in the sense in which the word is used here, means: the imposition of the will of another upon ours; on the other hand, authority presupposes subordination.

Engels defines authority as “the imposition of the will of another upon ours.”

On its own, this is clearly inadequate as a scientific definition. Who is “ours” referring to? Engels and the reader? The working classes? I assume Engels intended this as a more universal form, so restating it, his intended definition is something like “the imposition of the will of one party upon another.” This is more consistent with how “authority” is used elsewhere in the essay, since he discusses authority being imposed not only on us, but also the enemies of the proletariat.

Even this improved form is still imprecise though, since we have no clear meaning for “imposing” something. It seems like it could be interpreted in at least three ways.

Firstly, at the broadest, something might be imposed simply by being the case independently of our will, and therefore requiring us to adapt to it. This could include personal forms of authority, like someone ordering you around at gunpoint, but also impersonal ones. Rain may impose a need to find shelter, hunger to eat, danger to flee, sickness to rest, etc. In this sense, it is not only the laws of the State which are imposed on us, but the laws of physics.

This idea of authority is inseparable from existence itself. Reality defines the limits of possibility. Human ingenuity may surprise us, turning what was thought impossible into the possible, but this is a change in human scientific knowledge or our material circumstances. Any freedom we enjoy is built upon these laws of nature, not their violation. Omnipotence is forever beyond us. With any innovation, new limits are always discovered. Abolishing authority of this kind would be as ridiculous as calling to abolish the universe.

It seems like Engels’ definition of authority prevents us from interpreting things quite this broadly. He has not defined authority merely as “imposing,” but imposing a will . Who imposes the laws of nature? Unless the atheist Engels believed they were established by God, or perhaps has converted to some form of animism, it seems like this sort of meaning is ruled out or at least limited.

This brings us to the second option, which seems closely related to the first. Someone could be seen as “imposing” their will any time they act to achieve an end that conflicts with the will of another. For example, suppose there are two roommates, one of which wants to listen to music while the other wants things to be quiet. If the latter decides to play music, they can be said to be imposing this on the former. Likewise, if the former turns off the music, they would be imposing their will on the latter. This sense of imposition is especially seen in matters of etiquette, like when someone knocking at your door uninvited might say “sorry to impose.”

This meaning of impose is still incredibly broad but seems consistent with Engels’ definition. Abolishing authority in this sense is similarly absurd. While it would not require ending existence itself, it would require the end of the human race or its conversion into some unrecognizable hive mind. It would require no two people ever having conflicting goals, no matter how small, or else the person achieving their end would be imposing this state of affairs on the other.

Importantly, this interpretation is neutral on the way something is imposed or the kind of social relation it implies. All that matters is that the will of one party is implemented which conflicts with another. If you ask someone out and they decline, then this is an act of authority being imposed upon you. If Person A physically assaults Person B, then that is an act of authority, but so would Person B defending themselves from Person A. Even running from this fight would be an act of authority. This view of imposition and authority is unable to distinguish between something being imposed and resistance to that imposition. All it sees are two conflicting wills.

This brings us to a third option, where we do make this kind of distinction, considering not only the conflict in wills, but the methods used and their function. There are several different ways this distinction could be made, such as by appealing to some moral standard or sense of “legitimacy.” In this context though, the most obvious way to distinguish imposition would be with the establishment and exercise of relations of domination and servitude, of exploiter and exploited, considered in contrast to free association or resistance. This is especially relevant when we consider materialist class analysis, as is endorsed by Marxism, distinguishing between the classes of the oppressors and the oppressed. Slavery, for example, is clearly recognizable as the domination and exploitation of the slaves by the masters. This privileged position is backed by coercive force and may even be reaffirmed by law as an explicit right.

By contrast, the slaves may similarly use violence in a slave revolt against the masters. However, this violence would be clearly distinct in terms of purpose and function, reacting to the violent imposition of the masters and moving toward a system of freedom and equality. It is not simply reversing the previous relation, with the former slaves enslaving their former masters. The resistance to an imposition would not itself be considered an imposition, as if the slaves were “imposing” their own freedom upon the masters. We could also contrast this to the voluntary association of free and equal individuals, which looks even less like “imposing” anything when there is no coercion involved.

For an essay called “On Authority,” there is surprisingly little telling us what authority actually is. Engels does not clarify between any of these meanings. He does not compare and contrast different definitions or explore any of these nuances. He presents this definition as if its meaning is self-evident and uncontroversial. Without a clear definition or elaboration on Engels’ intended meaning, we need to infer this from his examples. When multiple interpretations are possible even there, confusion is spread even among good faith readers.

The one thing that he does clarify here is that he is defining authority “in the sense in which the word is used here.” In other words, he is defining authority in the same way he understood the anarchists are using it in their “regular crusade against what they call the principle of authority.” Engels is not challenging an inferior anarchist definition of authority so that it can be replaced by a superior Marxist one. Rather, he appears to believe there is no inconsistency with how he uses the term and how the anarchists use it.

If our analysis shows that Engels really is using a different definition of authority than the anarchists, then this would be the first major indication that he is misrepresenting his opponents. If he is trying to challenge the anarchists because they denounce all authority, then it is important that we understand properly what they mean by that term.

Finally, Engels also states that the word “authority” is inherently connected to the word “subordination,” with one presupposing the other. His definition of authority implies the existence of at least two parties, the ones imposing their will and the ones being imposed upon. The former is the authority, while the latter has been subordinated. We can see Engels connect other ideas with authority throughout the essay as well. For example, “autonomy” is treated as the opposite of authority, marking the absence of this kind of imposition. Likewise, “authority” is also identified with “despotic” relationships or being “dominant,” and “subordination” is identified with being “subjected” or being made “obedient.”

Now, since these two words sound bad, and the relationship which they represent is disagreeable to the subordinated party, the question is to ascertain whether there is any way of dispensing with it, whether — given the conditions of present-day society — we could not create another social system, in which this authority would be given no scope any longer, and would consequently have to disappear.

According to Engels, the main objection anarchists have to authority and subordination is that both words “sound bad” and that this authority is unpleasant for the subordinated party. This objection is clearly simplistic and shallow. Avoiding words that “sound bad” can certainly be rhetorically useful, and something being unpleasant is a good reason to avoid it if possible. But appearances can be deceiving, and dealing with some unpleasantness is simply part of life, if it can be shown to be necessary. Engels clearly wants to present the anarchist critique of authority as fundamentally naïve.

Since it is sufficient to tell the anarchist that “this or that act is authoritarian for it to be condemned,” the anarchist aims at creating a new social system which gets rid of authority entirely. Not only that, although it is unstated here, the anarchists also intended on achieving this authority-free society without the use of authority . The anarchist does not only want to achieve a non-authoritarian society, but wants to use non-authoritarian methods to get there.

“On Authority” is primarily a critique of these two positions, which he opposes with two main arguments.

Firstly, he attempts to show authority cannot be abolished even in a socialist future, or at least cannot be abolished without consequences even more disagreeable than authority itself. He does this by examining the type of society the anarchists advocate for and then demonstrating ways in which it actually does imply authoritarian relations, even if the anarchists themselves do not admit it. This is especially found in the need for administrative tasks to allow for groups to coordinate their actions with one another.

Second, he argues that achieving a socialist society will require utilizing authoritarian methods in our capitalist present. In particular, the workers will need, at least in some cases, to violently revolt against capitalism. This need for violence therefore also implies a need for authority, as does the conquest of state power and utilizing it to bring the means of production under the control of the proletariat.

The first argument here is clearly Engels’ main one and takes up the vast majority of the essay. His second argument takes up only a single paragraph near the end. Engels seems to view the first argument as the more important one since it implies a more fundamental error on the part of the anarchists, striving for an impossible goal. However, the second argument is the one that tends to receive far more attention from Marxists and is much more frequently cited.

On examining the economic, industrial and agricultural conditions which form the basis of present-day bourgeois society, we find that they tend more and more to replace isolated action by combined action of individuals. Modern industry, with its big factories and mills, where hundreds of workers supervise complicated machines driven by steam, has superseded the small workshops of the separate producers; the carriages and wagons of the highways have become substituted by railway trains, just as the small schooners and sailing feluccas have been by steam-boats. Even agriculture falls increasingly under the dominion of the machine and of steam, which slowly but relentlessly put in the place of the small proprietors big capitalists, who with the aid of hired workers cultivate vast stretches of land.

Engels begins by examining the current tendencies of production in “present-day bourgeois society” of capitalism out of which the future socialist society will grow.

The main tendency he focuses on is capitalism replacing systems where workers are relatively isolated with ones where they are brought together for large-scale industry, utilizing the “combined action” of individuals. Thus the “small workshops” are replaced with “big factories.”

This tendency goes hand-in-hand with technological changes. The isolated production of artisans, simple transportation, and small proprietors are replaced by complex machines attended by hundreds of workers. This is true not only of industrial production, but also for transportation and agriculture.

By utilizing combined action, workers are able to achieve far more than they could in isolation. This is a point consistently emphasized by Marx and Engels, and can be especially seen in chapters thirteen to fifteen of Marx’s Capital (1867). For example:

Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive power of a regiment of infantry is essentially different from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual cavalry or infantry soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and the same undivided operation, such as raising a heavy weight, turning a winch, or removing an obstacle. In such cases the effect of the combined labour could either not be produced at all by isolated individual labour, or it could only be produced by a great expenditure of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. Not only have we here an increase in the productive power of the individual, by means of co-operation, but the creation of a new power, namely, the collective power of masses. [6]

Earlier socialists had made similar points, helping to develop Marx and Engels’ understanding of this. There are some striking similarities, for example, between this idea of “combined action” or “collective power” and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon’s concept of “collective force.” This can be seen in Proudhon’s What is Property (1840):

A force of one thousand men working twenty days has been paid the same wages that one would be paid for working fifty-five years; but this force of one thousand has done in twenty days what a single man could not have accomplished, though he had labored for a million centuries. Is the exchange an equitable one? Once more, no; when you have paid all the individual forces, the collective force still remains to be paid. Consequently, there remains always a right of collective property which you have not acquired, and which you enjoy unjustly.

Even apart from machinery, this advantage of combined action exists. When Engels focuses on machinery, he is not merely pointing to the existence of combined action, but to the development of tools which presuppose it. A field may be worked by one person for many days, or for a few days by many people. But a factory can only be worked with combined action as many different tasks need to be done simultaneously.

Everywhere combined action, the complication of processes dependent upon each other, displaces independent action by individuals. But whoever mentions combined action speaks of organisation; now, is it possible to have organisation without authority?

Supposing a social revolution dethroned the capitalists, who now exercise their authority over the production and circulation of wealth. Supposing, to adopt entirely the point of view of the anti-authoritarians, that the land and the instruments of labour had become the collective property of the workers who use them. Will authority have disappeared, or will it only have changed its form? Let us see.

Engels maps out his first and primary argument. Society is moving towards greater combined action in production, which requires organization. But organization requires authority. Therefore, even in a future socialist society where the capitalists have been “dethroned,” authority will still be needed to make combined action possible.

Anarchism then is fundamentally mistaken. It believes that, by abolishing the authority of the capitalists, it will have abolished authority all together. But since it will retain these machines which presuppose combined action, this new society will need to establish an authority of its own in some new form. By directing their criticism against the principle of authority, the anarchists have fundamentally misunderstood the nature of socialism.

It is a built-in assumption of this argument though that the same tendencies Engels was witnessing in the 1800s would continue indefinitely, always towards greater combined action. No argument is given for this, and it seems like it could be challenged in at least two ways.

Firstly, we might tend towards decreased combined action as we move towards greater automation. This is already a notable tendency within capitalism, throwing workers into unemployment.

Secondly, it seems likely we will also need to reduce production in many areas due to the unsustainable and harmful practices of capitalist industry. Something that is unsustainable cannot last forever by definition. Finite resources do not allow for infinite growth. This point is especially made by the “degrowth” movement, highlighting the massive levels of ecological damage being forced upon us.

However, these objections do not strike at the heart of Engels’ argument, even if they undermine its strength. He wants to give a sense of inevitability here, where society must have factories because that is what he sees in capitalism. That is a very suspect claim. But even if it is not inevitable, the fact remains that anarchists generally don’t reject combined action or collective force. Even anarcho-primitivists, who explicitly advocate for deindustrialization and abolishing factories, do not call for an end to combined action. Even if we reject Engels’ technological determinism, anarchists still need to address his argument about combined action.

Let us take by way of example a cotton spinning mill. The cotton must pass through at least six successive operations before it is reduced to the state of thread, and these operations take place for the most part in different rooms. Furthermore, keeping the machines going requires an engineer to look after the steam engine, mechanics to make the current repairs, and many other labourers whose business it is to transfer the products from one room to another, and so forth. All these workers, men, women and children, are obliged to begin and finish their work at the hours fixed by the authority of the steam, which cares nothing for individual autonomy. The workers must, therefore, first come to an understanding on the hours of work; and these hours, once they are fixed, must be observed by all, without any exception.

Engels illustrates his previous point about the need for combined action by describing the technical requirements for operating a cotton spinning mill. For the mill to run, workers need to perform different tasks simultaneously, which requires them to coordinate when they work. By aligning their schedules, they are completing jobs at “fixed” times relative to each other. If they are not “observed by all, without any exception,” the factory cannot run. Because the factory cannot run without this coordination, the individual worker does not have the power to begin or end production whenever they please. Engels’ family actually owned large cotton-textile mills, so there is a good chance that he is speaking from personal experience in this regard.

He describes this situation as the hours of work being fixed “by the authority of the steam, which cares nothing for individual autonomy.” Engels first and primary example of an authority that will continue to exist in socialism then is the factory itself. This seems inconsistent with his own definition of authority. Previously, he defined authority as “the imposition of the will of another upon ours.” But a cotton mill doesn’t have any will of its own to impose. How can it be an authority?

At first, it seems like he is using the first interpretation of “imposed” that was ruled out. The factory acts as an “authority” here because we need to adapt our actions to the requirements of running it. This interpretation is occasionally defended by online Marxists. Abolishing authority in this case would be absurd as abolishing reality itself, since our options are always limited by our material conditions in some way.

But if Engels really meant to be interpreted this way, it seems like he could have made a much simpler argument. There are technical requirements for spinning cotton regardless of whether it is done by hundreds of workers in a mill or by a single worker with a spinning wheel. All of the discussion about combined action could have been dropped.

It seems like a more plausible interpretation of “authority” here needs to integrate combined action with the way in which “steam” can be an authority. I will analyze this more in the next section.

Also notable in this section is the inclusion of child factory workers in this future idealized socialist economy. This seems to line up with Marx and Engels’ demand in the Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848), which calls for the “Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition of children’s factory labor in its present form. Combination of education with industrial production, &c, &c.”

Marx seemed to believe child labor really was necessary for factories to function, and even viewed it as a positive good if it were paired with strictly regulated working time and proper safety measures. This can be seen in his Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875):

A general prohibition of child labor is incompatible with the existence of large-scale industry and hence an empty, pious wish. Its realization — if it were possible — would be reactionary, since, with a strict regulation of the working time according to the different age groups and other safety measures for the protection of children, an early combination of productive labor with education is one of the most potent means for the transformation of present-day society.

I am unaware of any time anarchists have described child labor as necessary for large-scale industry, but the idea of children gaining work experience and combining “education with industrial production” was one some anarchists have shared.

For example, the Swiss anarchist James Guillaume speculated in his Ideas of Social Organization (1876) what education might look like in anarchy:

We must distinguish two stages in the education of children: the first stage, where the child of five or six is not yet old enough to study science, and where the emphasis is on the development of the physical faculties; and a second stage, where children twelve to sixteen years of age would be introduced to the various divisions of human knowledge while at the same time learning one or more crafts or trades through practice.

Effectively the idea here is that, after abolishing the rigid capitalist division of labor, people would engage in both mental and physical labor to become more well-rounded. The education system would reflect this with a mixture of theoretical and practical lessons received directly from the workers who engage in both. This would include learning some basic tool use to repair their toys, as well as visiting various factories, or even being taken on as an apprentice by factory workers.

A frequent anarchist objection to “On Authority” is that Engels ignores the way factories have been intentionally designed to require certain capitalist abuses. The insistence on the necessity of child labor certainly seems like an instance of this. However, this does not actually strike to the core of Engels’ argument either, which is far more focused on the need for combined action itself rather than the technical needs of factories as they were designed in the late 19 th century.

There after particular questions arise in each room and at every moment concerning the mode of production, distribution of material, etc., which must be settled by decision of a delegate placed at the head of each branch of labour or, if possible, by a majority vote, the will of the single individual will always have to subordinate itself, which means that questions are settled in an authoritarian way.
