---
title: "Fragments concerning Freemasonry"
author: "Mikhail Bakunin"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mikhail-bakunin-fragments-concerning-freemasonry"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Working translation by Shawn P. Wilbur Retrieved on 25th April 2021 from www.libertarian-labyrinth.org and www.libertarian-labyrinth.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mikhail-bakunin-fragments-concerning-freemasonry.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mikhail-bakunin-fragments-concerning-freemasonry.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A.          Catechism of Modern Freemasonry        B. Catechism of Freemasonry          I. Theology          II. Humanity In order to become once again a living and useful body, Freemasonry must once again seriously take up the service of humanity. But what does these words mean today: to serve humanity? – Would it be to protect the innocents and the weak, to care for the sick, to feed and clothe the destitute, to give education to poor children? All of these works are extremely commendable and as practical applications of the principle of human fraternity, they are more or less part, according to the capacity of each, of the duties not only of a true freemason, but also of every man who is not a stranger to the sentiment of charity. However, if Freemasonry had no other aim but to practice them, there would be no difference between it and countless religious associations that also have no aim but the exercise of charity. – The immense difference that separates them [freemasons] from all those religious institutions is expressed uniquely by the different spirits in which Freemasonry on one hand, and the Christian associations on the other, distribute their education and their assistance. The latter have for their absolute and final aim the glory of God much more than the alleviation of human suffering, the triumph of the religious spirit, the submission of man to the divine yoke, and consequently to that of the Church and all the temporal authorities sanctioned by the Church—and as a necessary consequence the degradation and abdication of human reason, of human will, the negation of all liberty, slavery. – Freemasonry, on the contrary, if it wants to remain faithful to its primary purpose, must desire the complete emancipation of man, the constitution of humanity through liberty on the ruins of all authority. Religion says: “There is one God, eternal, absolute, all-powerful, otherworldly, individual. He encompasses the world, and he is outside and above this Universe that he has created. He is all light, Wisdom, Love, Beauty, Truth, Goodness and Justice. Apart from him, in the world and in man, as long as they have not been visited by his special grace, everything is only lies, iniquity and darkness. – It is the kingdom of death. Never, by his own efforts, can man rise up to God. Left to himself, he never would have even felt the longing, the desire; – for by itself the lie would never have any intuition of the truth, nor the darkness of perdition, the instinct of the divine light. So this desire is never kindled in the heart of man except as an effect of the divine grace that calls upon it in that manner and invites it to purify itself in order to receive the spirit of God. For if man cannot rise by himself up to heaven, God, in his supreme goodness, can descend to the world and to man in order to enlighten him, to make him race up through his grace, in order to be saved. – The World could not see God by itself and God not visibly inhabiting this world, he can only reveal himself through his elect. – These are his missionary Saints, his prophets, – this is finally how Christianity claims the very son of God, God like his Father, eternally one with him, although different from him. It is Jesus Christ who descends to the earth, makes himself a man, and suffers the martyrdom and humiliations of the cross, dies, is resurrected and rises up again into heaven, bearing with him the divine curse that weighed on all of humanity, and leaving to that humanity the possibility, the open path of salvation. What we call Truth and Justice thus exist only through a divine revelation. Human reason, left to itself, could only give rise to lies—and the heart, the conscience could produce only disorder and iniquity. Nothing is as fatal for man as having faith in his own reason, in his own heart, in his own conscience. – His reason is madness before God, and his natural justice, the instinct of his heart is an impiety. – To believe in it is …
