---
title: "Anarchists and Trade Unions"
author: "Pëtr Kropotkin"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kropotkin-anarchists-and-trade-unions"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First Published: Les Temps Nouveaux, May 25, 1907. This version: Freedom, June 1907, pp.5–6. Markup/Notes: by Graham Seaman for MIA, Jan 2021. https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/kropotkin-peter/1907/unions.htm"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kropotkin-anarchists-and-trade-unions.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kropotkin-anarchists-and-trade-unions.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[The following letter from Comrade Kropotkin, which appears in the Temps Nouveaux of May 25, we reprint in FREEDOM for the reason of its special interest at the present moment. It is only necessary to explain that a discussion on “Anarchism and Trade Unionism” has been carried on in the columns of the above paper between Pierrot and Lagardelle, in the course of which the latter had insinuated that Pierrot held a letter of Kropotkin’s which attacked Trade Unionism. The letter to Pierrot had been destroyed, but as Kropotkin discovered the copy he made, it was printed to dispel the false impression Lagardelle bad tried to convey. The letter was addressed to the French Publication Group of Socialist Students, and in other particulars explains itself. All the notes have been added by Kropotkin since the letter was written. For the better comprehension of the following it may be noted that the French “Syndicates” are Trade Unions, but that the French “Syndicalism” differs from English “Trade Unionism” in its revolutionary character. It considers the “Syndicate” as the arm for the Social Revolution and the cell of the future Communist society.] DEAR COMRADES,– I had agreed to write a preface to your pamphlet “Anarchists and Syndicates” before having read it; now, after reading it, I see that I should have to write, not a preface, but a criticism, and even a very plain-spoken one, upon certain facts. Instead of limiting themselves to arguments which might be adduced in favour of taking a more active part in Trade Union work, the authors have set forth general ideas on Anarchy that I cannot agree with, and besides they have subjected those who differ from them to little pin-pricks which I do not approve of. The conception of Anarchy that existed in the Collectivist and Federalist International is certainly not that of present-day comrades, and is not mine (page 10). An entire evolution has taken place during the last thirty years—a retrogression, some will perhaps say—a forward movement, according to my opinion. Between the “Idée sur l’organisation sociale,” of the Jura Federation, and “La Société Nouvelle,” “La Conquête du Pain,” etc., there is a whole generation which, to my mind, has neither trod the same ground nor gone back, and which would have been welcomed by Bakounin himself had he lived in our time. [1] The conception “Anarchist because Communist” is your own . Well, it has perhaps the advantage of making Communism the more important; but at least admit that it is not shared by a great number of Anarchists; that for many liberty is as dear as bread—I am one of those [2] —that there are many who call themselves Anarchists although Communists, and that there are absolutely sincere comrades who believe Communism and Anarchism to be incompatible, which in no wise hinders many of them thinking there is much to be done in Trade Unions. [3] In the third part of your pamphlet you allow yourself to be carried away so far by your argument that you make several assertions which you would find it difficult to prove. No doubt on entering a Trade Union an Anarchist makes a concession–just as he does when he goes to register the name of his newspaper, or when he asks for permission to hold a meeting in Trafalgar Square; even when he signs the lease of his lodging or of his co-operative farm, or when he allows himself to he handcuffed without retaliating with his fists. To style “ideologists” those who demonstrate that there is a concession is neither just nor justifiable. Without these ideologists you would be flogged in prison, as is still the custom in England. On entering a Trade Union you make a concession, and when you say that the concession is less than is generally believed, you are right; but let us not deny that it is a concession, like those mentioned above (asking for authorisation, lease, handcuffs), which make us hate the present system the more. On entering a Trade Union you are certainly carried away by your surroundings, as…
