---
title: "ADULTHOOD IS A TRAP"
author: "Flower Bomb"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/flower-bomb-adulthood-is-a-trap"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Anti-Natalism, Youth Liberation, and a Refusal to Surrender"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "flower-bomb-adulthood-is-a-trap.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/flower-bomb-adulthood-is-a-trap.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       To love one’s self...        To love another...        To drop out and play... If life is to be understood as the free-flowing heartbeat of adventure, emotions, and experiences, then adulthood is similar to a clogged artery; an emotional constipation of desire and imagination. Adulthood resembles an alter-ego socially assigned the task of maintaining a work-over-play ethic, creating a nostalgic longing for a distant youthfulness and freedom. There was a point in my life where my mind was possessed so thoroughly by the phantoms of adulthood. My daily life was a complex web of various social relationships ultimately determined by the slave/master mentality. My wages paid bills and left just enough for me to accumulate trendy materialism - as if in a strange spiritual attempt to feel in control over my life. Work, eat, buy, sleep, and repeat. To the rest of society, I was an ordinary responsible adult. But for me, this lifestyle was nothing more than a graveyard in disguise. What if self-love was more than just finding a “better” job, going to church, or accumulating more materialism in order to satisfy that urge for something different? I have come to understand how accurate the whole “misery loves company” concept really is. For every person who finds joy in limitless travel and adventure, there are three times as many who are quick to assume the worst of such a lifestyle. The comfort granted by social assimilation and conformity encourages many individuals to create a personal identity and relationship to sendentary life. Most often this identity and relationship is based on a feeling of safety, and therefore is understood as positive. This all despite the experienced misery of day-to-day montony and wage-slavery. From this perspective, I am compelled to understand that any lifestyle that strays from the normalcy of adulthood can only be perceived by many as dangerous and irresponsible. I have come to understand that self-love doesn’t always resemble conventional ideas of positivity. Ultimately the “positivity” of any lifestyle transformation is always subjective. For some, abandoning all sendentary living - having a job, owning a house or renting an apartment, getting married, and having kids, etc - might be considered down right irresponsible. But for others it is a personal pursuit of creating liberation through refusing to “grow up”. The social pressure to “grow up” corresponds to a general hostility toward youthfulness. Youthfulness is often (accurately) recognized as insubordinate to authority, and is therefore a target for social supression. This is a big reason why the youth, legally stripped of their autonomy, are viewed by society as in need of authoritarian guidence and discipline. The general consensus insists on the prompt discouragment of any unruly instincts of rebellious play. Adulthood is standardized as the necessary end result of surpressing one’s youth. Adulthood could be understood as the forefront, individual responsibility for upholding the mores and values integral to maintaining civil order. Once an individual reaches a certain age, all youthful behavior, desires, and instincts are expected to have been supressed into a graveyard of distant memories. But this is not enough... Upon this completed transformation into adulthood, people are then expected to create more youth to eventually turn into adults. Each adult individual is collectively pressured to accept procreation as a normal and necessary part of life – a “common good” wrapped up in the social pressures of culture and tradition, community and religion, love and family. Each individual adult is expected to fulfill the role of not only maintaining industrial society through their own individualized wage-slavery, but also of securing the future of society by creating more future wage-slaves. And of course, procreation is not without social reward. Society grants those who procreate elevated social status and respectability in the form of pr…
