---
title: "Christian anarchism is as old as Christianity itself"
author: "Renée Roden"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renee-roden-christian-anarchism-is-as-old-as-christianity-itself"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "While some might associate modern anarchism with lawlessness and violence, its roots lie deep in early Christianity. Retrieved on April 9, 2025 from https://uscatholic.org/articles/202407/christian-anarchism-is-as-old-as-christianity-itself/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "renee-roden-christian-anarchism-is-as-old-as-christianity-itself.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renee-roden-christian-anarchism-is-as-old-as-christianity-itself.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The origins of anarchism        Christians were anarchists first        The Catholic version of Christian anarchism        The revolution of the Spirit In the foothills of British Columbia’s Rocky Mountains, about two miles north of the border with the United States, there is a small commune known as Hardy Mountain Doukhobor Village. The village—now abandoned—was built around 1912. This small community is one of the many small communities of Christians around the world who practice Christian anarchism. The Doukhobors are a small group of Christians whose name comes from the Russian word for “Spirit-wrestlers.” They believe God is present in all things, including in each human person. For the Doukhobors, neither scripture, iconography, nor the Russian Orthodox Church could claim more authority for revealing God than a butterfly or a baby. This resistance to iconography and the Russian state church prompted Tzar Nicholas I to exile the Doukhobors and other Anabaptist Christians in Russia to Ukraine. In exile, the Doukhobors looked for a friendly country in which to land. In 1899, the group fled to Canada. Leo Tolstoy, the author of Anna Karenina and War and Peace , had sworn off writing fiction after he experienced a religious conversion, but when Tolstoy heard of the persecution the Doukhobors were facing, he quickly finished his novel Resurrection and donated the royalties to the Doukhobors’ travel fund. But the Doukhobors faced persecution in their new home, too. They were given land to homestead in Saskatchewan, but they refused to swear allegiance to the Canadian government, so their land was forfeited. Many of them moved west, to British Columbia. They created villages, some with communal homes, some with private residences, all with a communally shared commitment to agriculture and prayer. Their motto was: “Toil and peaceful living.” A splinter sect, the Sons of Freedom, was a more violent group. They resisted materialism by setting their homes on fire. They refused to send their children to the government’s public schools, and many of their children were taken away and put in Canada’s residential schools, where their home culture was disciplined out of them. Now, according to the most recent Canadian census data, there are only 1,675 Doukhobors left. If you ask a Christian if they’re an anarchist (I did), many of them will tell you, “Absolutely not.” But a select few might say, “Of course: Christians were the first anarchists.” Indeed, Christianity has a long history of anarchism that dates back to the early Christians of scripture and continues to today. In order to understand Christian anarchism, it’s important to first define anarchy , which can mean, much like Paul was to his readers, “all things to all people.” Anarchism was coined in the 18 th century during the French Revolution. It was originally a pejorative term meaning what it so often does today: chaos and disorder. “Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,” as William Butler Yeats wrote in “The Second Coming,” the emblematic poem of the 20 th century. Forty years after the French Revolution, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon was the first philosopher to embrace the term to describe his political philosophy, which was grounded in mutual aid, shared property, eradication of inequality, and a rejection of capitalism. Proudhon was not Christian. Like many democratically minded philosophers of the 19 th century, Proudhon clashed with the hierarchy-heavy Roman Catholic Church due to his post-monarchical politics. Religion, in the form of the Catholic Church and state churches, seemed diametrically opposed to anarchism. “I think of Christian anarchism as beginning with Tolstoy,” says Harry Murray, a retired professor of sociology at Nazareth College and a Catholic Worker. In 1879, when he was 51, Tolstoy had a spiritual crisis. The son of nobility, he became profoundly critical of the bourgeois attitude in which he was raised, where he absorbed a preoccupation with world…
