---
title: "Against World War III"
author: "Songül Karabulut"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/songul-karabulut-against-world-war-iii"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Social organization beyond state power"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "songul-karabulut-against-world-war-iii.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/songul-karabulut-against-world-war-iii.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Change of the world order        Drive for power accumulation        Social organization beyond power structures        A brief chronology of the Third World War        Proxy war in Syria and Iraq        The exploitation of Libya and Turkey        Turkey and the AKP        Idlib – a turning point?        Turkey’s domestic policy        Turkey will remain in power because capitalist modernity needs it        Conclusion The year 2019 was marked by wars and resistance, and it is already clear that 2020 will be even more eventful. Only three days after New Year’s Eve, the commander of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, Qasem Soleimani, was assassinated in Baghdad by the USA, and at the end of January Trump published his “Peace Plan of the Century” for the Middle East conflict. While Turkey is occupying further areas in Northeast Syria and is currently struggling for Idlib, Erdoğan had the mandate for a Turkish military operation in Libya approved by the Turkish parliament on January 2 and sent fighters to intervene in the Libyan conflict on his behalf. One after the other Libya conferences take place sometimes in Istanbul under Putin and Erdoğan, then in Berlin under Merkel, then in Geneva under UN orientation, all without any noteworthy success. The Syrian regime is expanding its power in the country and is currently taking action against armed militias in Idlib despite resistance and criticism. Military clashes are taking place between Turkey and the Syrian regime. Is the tide finally turning for Turkey in Syria? Undoubtedly, events are not limited to those in the Middle East; a whirlwind is also sweeping the world. In Latin American countries protests against police violence, social inequality, autocratic leadership and manipulation and corruption are increasing. The EU is changing due to the departure of Great Britain and EU states are struggling with both economic crises and the strengthening of right-wing parties. Climate protests and women’s uprisings decorate the streets. The USA declares war on China economically by blocking its own door from the competition. In addition to political developments, natural events and diseases such as the forest fires in Australia or the coronavirus dominate the agenda. It is hardly possible to capture developments on the basis of daily political events if the strategic driving force behind all these changes is not taken into account. Before we look at current developments and try to put them into context, it might be useful to recall some key points: We are dealing with a systemic crisis and with the capitalist system’s attempt to use military, political, economic and psychological means to build a new political system in its interests. Even if the New World Order is cemented with the reorganization of the Middle East, it is by no means just a regional conflict. The transformation of the world order, led by the hegemonic power of capitalism, the USA, in the form of a new world war, the Third World War, is currently being carried out with full violence and destruction in the region. This project is meeting with resistance. The regional nation states, for example, with their regimes, which were brought to power in the 20 th century with the support of the West and kept there, and which are now defending the status quo, are resisting because they are now being disempowered one by one. These regional regimes have done their duty in the eyes of capitalism and are now an obstacle to be overcome. Then there are the population and social groups, the masses who have been deprived of breath, both under capitalism and under their governments, are oppressed and exploited, who now stand up for their interests and rights and fill the streets. The fact that we are dealing with a systemic change is not only noticeable because of the disempowered regimes, but also because all international institutions, organizations and “values” as well as political and diplomatic practices are changing and losing th…
