---
title: "PopSec: Andor"
author: "Håkan Geijer"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/riot-medicine-popsec-andor"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2024-01-08 from opsec.riotmedicine.net/static/downloads/popsec-andor.pdf"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "riot-medicine-popsec-andor.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/riot-medicine-popsec-andor.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/riot-medicine-popsec-andor)

Warning! This text contains significant spoilers for the Star Wars series Andor . However, each section only references events up until that episode, so it’s safe to read one section at a time as you watch the series.

Operational security is the practices taken by an individual or group to reduce the amount of useful intelligence that can be gleaned by an adversary. It may be to hide their movements, their intents, their goals, or their identities. Anarchists, activists, and others involved with liberatory movements are aware that there are those with power who want to prevent a liberated world from being brought into existence. To these ends, operational security (OpSec for short) is employed to allow them to achieve their goals while minimizing disruption. In common usage, it more often means “how to do shit without getting caught” than its original definition that was narrowly focused on the concept of military intelligence and operations.

Discussions of OpSec may be strictly theoretical, discussing idealized and constructed scenarios, though these often lack sufficient depth to be deeply instructive. When discussions are based on reality and they analyze a subject and their adversaries, it’s done with imperfect knowledge and one has to resort to guesswork. A third method is to analyze stories in popular culture through the lens of OpSec in the aptly named process of PopSec.

PopSec is a little more lighthearted than other forms of analysis, and it has the benefit of using well-established worlds with characters known to the reader. There’s no inventing of the subjects Alice and Bob and some abstract adversary Eve. We’re working with characters who have motivations and personalities we understand in a world with equally established organizations and movements.

I’ve been a fan of Star Wars since I was a wee lad with its themes of DIY do-gooders taking on space fascists, and as an adult anarchist I was captivated by Rogue One . Guerilla rebels and militant factions working in conjunction with little to no supplies to take down occupiers, sacrifice themselves so that others might live. It struck a chord.

However, the scope of the operations of the Rebel Alliance is not something most anarchists are able to emulate unless they’re working with the AANES, [1] EZLN, [2] or similar. We operate more as insurrectionaries rather than as an opposing quasi-State with a regulated military. Andor is a series about how one of the main characters of Rogue One , Cassian Andor, came to be involved with the groups that would later form the Rebel Alliance. As such, the nature of their operations are more akin to how we operate today, and there are many lessons we can learn from how the protagonists conduct themselves.

In the opening scene when Cassian arrives at the brothel on Morlana One looking for his sister, he is knowingly there illegally, additionally having arrived on a stolen ship. A hostess begins talking with him which upsets two corporate security guard across the bar who had been waiting longer. He knows the danger because he warns the hostess to attend to the guards first because “it’s a company town.” When she leaves to look for someone matching his sister’s description, Cassian stares down the guards provoking them to take interest in him. He’s made himself a target.

They follow him after he leaves and try to shake him down in a back alley. Cassian offers the credits in his jacket pocket and one guard is extracting them, he knocks him back then fights and disarms the other guard. Cassian’s mission at this time is not to fight the injustices of the Empire and its subsidiaries but to find his sister. Fighting the guards, while good and just, puts his primary objective at risk. He would have been better off treating the 300 credits as the cost of getting some information from the hostess and being able to continue. Instead, he risked death and is now on the lam after killing two guards. This extra heat will make his primary objective more difficult to achieve.

Twice in the opening scene has Cassian failed to keep a low profile and has complicated his life as a result. What’s more interesting is that if he did all this with just one friend who could be a second pair of eyes, a second body, and second voice to calm Cassian, he would have been far safer. [3]

The guards after feeling disrespected by “a skinny thing like [Cassian]” decide to exact revenge on him. They think that a lone slim individual will be an easy target, and during their attempted shakedown they identify him as a foreigner. In a world where everyone is armed and fleeing from a crime scene can lead to an interplanetary hunt, they should know the risks associated wit ha shakedown. Further, armed civilians are common in the Star Wars universe. They don’t account for the fact that extorting a bit of money from someone in poverty might be equivalent to a death sentence. They are unable to understand that someone with nothing to lose will react far more dangerously than someone who can suffer the loss. They assume that their authority alone will protect them, but authority only works when there is a credible threat of violence that follows. Their victim is able to fight back in part because the odds that someone is able to come after him for what he’s done is very low. And even further, as security guards, they should know that the absence of cameras work in their target’s favor. No face, no case. Higher chances that someone will fight back.

When news of their deaths reaches the Chief Inspector Hyne, he points out to his overly enthusiastic and by-the-book subordinate Syril that investigating their deaths would uncover corruption and malfeasance by Preox-Morlana security. The guards were drinking contraband beverages—that they could only afford because of taking bribes—in a brothel they weren’t supposed to be in while on duty. Further, Pre-Mor care more about the political expediency of the illusion of control than actual control itself. So not only did the guards not understand the danger of Cassian, they wouldn’t even be avenged because systemic issues prevent it.

One should be aware of the structures within which they operate and the political circumstances so that they can factor in the reactions of their compatriots should any harm befall them. You might choose to go out in a blaze of glory knowing no one will follow in your wake, but such a decision should not be made on the assumption that someone will follow.

The next day on Ferrix, [4] Cassian is awoken by his adoptive mother’s droid B2EMO and is told that his mother among others came by looking for him while he was out on his escapades. Cassian tells the droid to lie on his behalf to cover his activities. In town, Cassian meets his friend Brasso and after a small nudge gets Brasso to cover for him if anyone asks where he was. Brasso takes the story Cassian was weaving and embellishes to account for the visible injuries Cassian got from the fight.

Because our lives connect with the lives of others, our whereabouts and activities will be under some amount of scrutiny, and have someone who can provide cover or an alibi for you without question is important for conspiratorial activities.

This trust, however, has a limit. After meeting Brasso, Cassian goes to meet Bix, co-conspirator involved in black market sales, at her place of work. They have a tense back and forth where Cassian asks Bix to contact her fence [5] so he can sell off some item and leave town due to the presumed heat from the murders. She quips that he’s been holding out on her, and he replies that she’s been skimming off the top too. Bix suggests that Cassian could instead sell directly to her, and he refuses because as much as they might be partners, he needs to look out just for himself.

While we are entitled to look out for ourselves to some extent, breeding mistrust and ill will by withholding resources and information in what should be a trusted environment can impair one’s willingness to take risks of make sacrifices on our behalf. We should be cautious about alienating those we rely on as this will affect future actions.

Cassian arrives at Maarva’s hovel where she confronts him about the Pre-Mor security bulletin looking for a Kenari in relation to the deaths of two guards. Their conversation is so important, it’s worth repeating in full.

Maarva Who else knows? Cassian About what? Maarva That you were born on Kenari. Cassian You don’t want to hear what happened? Maarva Mhmm, we’ll get to that. But who knows? Who have we told? Cassian I don’t know, I— Maarva We have always said Fest. Every doc I’ve ever submitted has always said you were born on Fest. Have you ever said anything other than Fest? Cassian Officially, no. I don’t think so. But people, yes. Maarva Who? Cassian Uh… And so did you. Maarva Well, how many? Cassian I don’t know. It’s not something I’ve been keeping track of! Maarva Well, everyone I’ve told is dead. Cassian That’s ridiculous. Jezzi. Sammo. Hmm? Maarva That’s family. Cassian If we’re making a list, we’re making a list. Maarva Well, it’s all your women that I’m worried about. Cassian Oh, come on. Please. Maarva Femmi, Karla, Sondreen. Cassian Stop. Stop! Maarva There are some names I don’t even know! B2EMO B-B-Bix. Cassian Bix has nothing to do with this. Maarva But then who told these Pre-Mor bastards about Kenari? Cassian (pause) That would be me. (Cassian argues with B2EMO) Maarva Cassian, what have you done? Cassian I messed up.

Their conversation tersely goes through many of the phases of people’s reactions to finding out there’s been an information leak. Cassian starts by trying to make excuses as if his mother’s anger is about why he’s being pursued, not that he wasn’t careful. Often when we make OpSec mistakes, our instinct is to justify them based of intents or results and not acknowledge that they happened and try to resolve the issue or perform a root cause analysis

Maarva is right to quickly jump to figuring out who might have leaked the information. It would help them figure out who can still be trusted and what avenues exist for keeping Cassian safe. Cassian says he hasn’t been keeping track of who he’s told about his true identity, and that is precisely one of the problems with having multiple alias and identities. We generally see ourselves as one complete person, and it can be hard to remember with whom we’ve shared what version of ourselves. Online this can be easier because of the simplistic and stunted interactions we have with others, but offline this can be far harder.

His mother’s criticism that he probably shared his identity with too many lovers is extremely valid. We often mistake passion and intimacy for trust, and even aside from our activist lives, most of us have probably been burned by an ex who knew too much about us and who either maliciously or innocently didn’t hold their tongue. However, she also brushes off her indiscretions as wise and prudent while Cassian’s are rash an foolish. He in turn is right to actually make the full list of who knows his true identity because the leak coming from within their circle of trust is plausible.

Over the course of the conversation, he realizes that having said he was looking for his Kenari sister while on Morlana One was the source of the leak. Admitting you’ve made a mistake and putting your ego aside is critical for OpSec. We all fuck up and have weaknesses, and being able to identify and work around them is the only way forward. If we lie to ourselves and others, we will take ill-informed actions.

At the start of the episode, we see Bix at work reading a terminal. It shows her the bulletin from Pre-Mor asking for information about Cassian. Her coworker and lover Timm comes in, and she hurriedly closes it before declining his invitation for dinner and zipping off to warn Cassian. Timm turns the terminal back on and sees what she was looking at. This piques his interest again, and he secretly follows her as she leaves.

Her decision to turn the terminal off when Timm walks in is based on her knowledge that Timm is suspicious of Cassian and their relationship, but in her hurry she doesn’t completely wipe what she was doing. This small detail was enough to cause the info about the hunt for Cassian to spread a little further in particular to someone who’s already suspicious.

Closing apps on our phones, using private browsing, and cleaning up printed materials when we leave a space are all trivial tasks, but they stop snippets of info from leaking. When we go to show a friend a funny picture, an important conversation might pop up when we unlock our phone. When we spontaneously bring someone back to our flat, sensitive materials might be scattered on our desk, and people tend to be curious. All this information might get out anyway, but it’s better to slow the spread.

In the first episode after Cassian argues with Bix about selling directly to her fence, Timm confronts him as he leaves and gets protective of Bix, and we later see him following her around town. It’s implied by what B2EMO says when Cassian is arguing with Maarva about his lovers being a source of the leak that Cassian had an affair of some sort with Bix prior to her starting one with Timm, and this is confirmed in E07. Timm exhibits classic signs of patriarchal protectiveness over “his” woman. Bix was right to say “he’d do anything for me” when Cassian asks if he knows about their crimes. She meant it in the sense that he would protect her and that which is important to her from external threats, but the truth is that Timm would do anything to have her for himself . When he follows her to a cantina after seeing the Pre-Mor bulletin, he sees Bix having a seemingly intimate conversation with Cassian. He wants Cassian out of the picture, so he snitches to Pre-Mor causing them to send a snatch squad.

As the saying goes, misogynists make great informants. [6] Timm’s passion and dedication aren’t to the ideals that Bix and Cassian share, about the joys of ripping off the Empire to make a few credits to survive. He simply wants to have Bix as his own. Bix and Cassian are criminals, not revolutionaries at this time. In fact, we know their criminal relationship is slightly adversarial where they hold out on each other for personal gain. This is a case where if they were more altruistic and had developed a coherent politic of mutual aid or liberation, Timm’s possessiveness would have been revealed for what it is. Their selfishness made it impossible to see his and what a threat that was.

It is not enough to do the right things. We have to also do them for the right reasons, not just from an ethical perspective, but because the analytic tools that come from well-developed liberatory theories allow us to spot false allies and snitches easier.

As we see later in E03, Timm knows Cassian is from Kenari because Bix mentioned it to him. Cassian was right to trust Bix to not use that knowledge against him, but every person we tell our secrets to is another person that might let it slip. It’s easier for us to keep track of what knowledge about our own lives is secret, but it’s much harder to do so with information about the lives of others. Keeping our whole lives private from others can be unsustainable, and a way to help minimize information spreading like this is to be extremely explicit about what information of ours is secret and under what conditions it can be shared. These conversations might feel awkward or too formal, but they protect us from accidents.

In E01 when, Syril tells his subordinates to send the bulletin to Ferrix, his staff say that they “don’t have presence there” and that it’s only “technically” under Pre-Mor jurisdiction. One even says “They have their own way of doing things.” En route, Sergeant Linus Mosk addresses the snatch squad and says “There may be some local residents who less than enthused with our presence.” Syril and Linus had previously hyped each other up on the arrest because they were both true believers in the use of force and the virtue of the Empire. Again, Syril dons his “righteousness armor” and assumes because they are authorized to do something and that it is the right thing that there will be minimal negative outcomes.

This is more often seen with liberal activists than with hardened revolutionaries. They might do something like arrange a permitted protest or engage in minor civil disobedience because they are de jure allowed to but are then shocked when they find the cops kettling, arresting, or brutalizing them.

Moreover, Syril fails to understand why people obey laws or submit to power. They do so because of the credible threat of violence. The planned dozen men taking on a city is not a credible threat of violence because there is no backup. Arrests in more densely policed areas work because the suspect and bystanders can reasonably expect overwhelming force to arrive should there be resistance. Syril and Linus seem to think that some rowdy yokels will be kept in line by their authority even without a backing threat.

OpSec isn’t just about staying hidden. It’s about making assessments of one’s adversary and asking what are the likely actions they may take. Syril and Linus have not done their homework and ignored caution, and as a result have not taken appropriate precautions for their operation. Don’t be like them. Look at general trends in State and non-State repression, and do specific research on your targets before carrying out an action.

When Bix’s fence Luthen Rael arrives, she tells him “There’s been a complication.” She tells him about the security bulletin, and responds to his question that—to her knowledge—Cassian hasn’t been identified by the guards yet. While he doesn’t say it aloud, he knows that Pre-Mor is coming for Cassian. His response is only that they should move quick.

Luthen isn’t just a fence. He’s also an organizer of the resistance to the Empire that would later become the Rebel Alliance. He wants more than just the goods Cassian has swiped. He wants Cassian’s skills as an infiltrator, and he’s willing to take a personal risk to those ends. A bit of risk now for a large payoff is worth it to him.

OpSec is about risk management. We identify what risks exist so that we can make plans around them while we pursue our goals. Total safety is never the goal of an insurrectionist. If that was a goal, they’d throw away their ideals, keep their head down, and assimilate into the dominant power structures. Luthen has gathered information and is taking a calculated risk. Likewise, when we choose our targets or actions, we don’t do so blindly or with an illusion of total safety, but with some knowledge possible outcomes.

One of Cassian’s priorities with making the deal with Bix’s fence is that he wants to leave money for Maarva and those he owes. He gives a commlink to B2EMO so that if he has to stash the money somewhere while making a quick escape, the droid can pick it up.

While waiting for Luthen, Cassian radios B2EMO to check that comms are working. From his side, this may be nervousness or a bit of whistling in the dark while he waits. Unfortunately, the guards are already at Maarva’s hovel while looking for Cassian and overhear his innocuous messages. Linus pulls out some sort of device and gets a fix on Cassian’s location.

In the warehouse, a device [7] in Luthen’s pocket begins beeping. He checks it then asks if Cassian is carrying a commlink. Cassian says yes. Luthen takes it, smashes it, and says “Rule number one. Never carry anything you don’t control.”

A recurring theme in activism, espionage, and modern warfare is how much our digital footprints can blow our cover. Phones track our location and smart watches do the same. Radio signals can give away locations and be used to target artillery strikes.

What Luthen says is true enough: we should we wary of carrying things we don’t control. The advantages gained from phones and online accounts can sometimes make them too tempting, and having viable alternatives makes leaving these devices behind far easier. It would have been far better for Cassian to plan out some dead drop locations with B2EMO than to try to coordinate it after making the sale.

Luthen and Cassian arrive on Aldhani where Luthen explains to him some of the details of the heist against the Imperial payroll held at the local garrison. Luthen tells him to pick a name to use with the people he’s about to meet. Cassian picks Clem, his adoptive father’s name. After getting pinched by the cops because of his past connection to Kenari, Cassian should be more wary about choosing a name that can be linked to him.

A common error when using pseudonyms or constructing aliases is that we want them to still have a bit of ourselves in them. We might use something like an old nickname from our childhood or even our pet’s name. Any misdirection is helpful, but making the leap to something completely random and nondescript makes it harder to link your identities.

After arguing with Luthen about the merits of taking on a new member, Vel accepts Cassian and they begin walking to the rebel camp. Cassian is curious about Luthen. Vel says over course of the conversation “You should have asked him that when you had the chance,” “He is something we will never discuss,” and “We never mention him [to the others].”

It is not her decision to reveal information about Luthen. Only he can do that, and without some long-standing rule about what can or cannot be said or some explicit agreement in this case, Vel takes a sensible default of silence. Luthen may not fully trust Cassian, and Vel may not either. There’s some risk of Cassian being captured, and the less he knows the better. Likewise, as some sort of wealthy benefactor, the grunts who risk their lives in the mud for the rebellion might resent his existence if they knew much about him, so it’s better that he effectively doesn’t exist.

This sort of silence is common practice among anarchists. Not even just when someone new is around, but also among trusted friends, we don’t spill or comrades’ secrets just because someone asks. Sharing information about someone’s identity, origin, or activities can be dangerous, and more importantly it is a matter of consent. When personal information is shared, it is done so with only those it was directly shared with and without any implied consent for it to be spread further.

A similar scenario as just discussed replays after Vel and Cassian arrive at the camp. The other rebels are generally not keen on someone being added so late, and when questioned about it Vel hides her relation to Cassian and only says that he comes highly recommended and that she trusts him. She trusts Luthen, and since she can safely assume that Luthen has done his research, by proxy she should also trust Cassian. In this case Vel brokers trust between Luthen (who is unknown to the rebels) and the rebels themselves so as to hide Luthen’s connection and also Cassian’s past.

When operating in small clandestine affinity groups, we often have connections to others. We need to somehow establish trust with these connections or when individuals join us. However, if everyone knows everything about everything about everyone, the cell model of security breaks down. Vouching is the process by which we can establish trust without needing all of one’s information. Typically this process is that one person serves as a trust broker and either does the research themselves or uses another trusted party who knows the individual in question quite well to establish the appropriate level of trust that should be extended to said individual. When used well, vouching can allow trust to be established while still hiding connections from complete exposure.

On Coruscant, the capital of the Galactic Empire, senator Mon Mothma arrives via air speeder to Luthen’s antiquities shop where he plays the role of a respectable and dignified curator. Luthen’s assistant Kleya points out that Mon’s driver is someone new. Mon steps in, and she and Luthen put on a ceremonious greeting for the driver as if he were a spy before they retreat to the back room under the cover of looking at newly arrived items.

Once they have privacy, Luthen asks if Mon can get him the money she’s agreed to, and she replies that there’s difficulty because of Empires actions. Luthen dismisses her worries saying ”Oh, they’re watching everyone.” She responds that she’s heavily surveilled including new staff at her bank and her driver. She also says that she wants to bring someone new onboard. Luthen replies that they’re too vulnerable and they need money, not more people.

Both have points. Insurrection cannot be sustained on hope alone; it needs bread too. However, someone who is under heavy surveillance bringing a new person around carries its own risks. It’s not just whether they’re an informant but if they are careful enough with their words and actions or if they could be leveraged to turn if captured.

Without the time or funds, the insurrection could fail. Just as easily, without outside help, it could fail too. OpSec is about risk management, not elimination. Bringing someone on board to help might be risky, but without their help you might be dead in the water. A balance is often struck by taking active efforts to obfuscate true plans or motivations so that those who help us can’t piece together what we’re doing but we still benefit from their assistance.

After Cassian’s first night at the camp, he awakes to his possessions missing. Across camp, his gear is spread out on a workbench as Arvel washes himself beside it. Cassian is upset that his new comrades would rifle through his things, but before he can speak Arvel tells him that Vel had asked him to take a look and that the stakes are high. In particular, Arvel is suspicious of the Pre-Mor service revolver that Cassian had nicked from the guards he killed in the first episode. They also have a back and forth when Arvel sees that Cassian has noticed his prison tattoos.

The members of the cell are right to be suspicious of someone new who will eventually hold all their lives in his hand. Vel might trust Luthen, and the others might trust Vel, but when the consequences of a security fuck up are death or life in prison, they need the peace of mind of having looked themselves. It might not prove conclusively [8] one way or another that Cassian is or isn’t an Imperial agent, but it can be evidence in support of their doubts or evidence of Cassian’s authenticity.

This tactic may seem invasive or even extreme to novice activists, but this pattern is not unfamiliar in radical communities. Presence at community events or simply “knowing a guy” isn’t sufficient to establish trust with clandestine groups. Often at a minimum, such groups will use OSINT methods to research new people and might even conduct make the person submit to a background check they run themselves. As Arvel noted, one can’t be too cautious when the stakes are so high.

After his encounter with Arvel, Cassian sits down to breakfast with Nemik. Nemik pulls out some complicated navigational contraption.

Cassian That’s an old one. Nemik Old, and true. And sturdy. One of the best navigational tools ever built. Can’t be jammed or intercepted. Something breaks, you can fix it yourself. Cassian Hard to learn. Nemik Yes, but once you’ve mastered it, you’re free. We’ve grown reliant on Imperial tech, and we’ve made ourselves vulnerable. There’s a growing list of things we’ve known and forgotten, things they’ve pushed us to forget.

Nemik is a starry-eyed idealist as those who write manifestos are wont to be, and we’re supposed to take this as lofty and impractical, but he is spot on with his analysis.

As I’m writing this, on the 18 th of November in the year 2022, Twitter is in its possible death throes after mass layoffs, and people are pointing to its loss as a crushing blow to activism. The Arab Spring, Occupy, and less striking things like the ability to more easily crowdsource funds are all held up as things that were only possible through Twitter. However, Twitter was and is controlled by entities that are actively hostile to us, and our inability to think of alternatives harms us.

Twitter is easy to use. It’s there, it works, and changing away from it is hard. But looking back at instances where it was used to positive ends neither says that those ends couldn’t have otherwise been met with other tools or that future events would require the same tools.

This isn’t just about Twitter. Mobile phones and the internet itself might be powerful and easy to use compared to their analog counterparts, but our reliance on them without having alternatives is a risk we need to contend with. How will we communicate? Spread ideas? Create propaganda? Navigate? Do research and gather intelligence? We should practice using alternatives where possible to avoid current repression and create possibilities in the future.

Back on Coruscant, ISB [9] agent Dedra Meero continues to track missing supplies with her subordinate Heert. First tipped off about this by the star path unit Cassian tried to sell to Luthen, she’s come to realize that there is some sort of pattern.

Dedra He’s right though. It’s too spread out to be organized. Heert But you don’t believe that. Dedra I know this. If i was them, this is how I’d do it. I’d spread it out. Never climb the same fence twice. Heert It’s too random to be random.

From Dedra’s end, all she can see is missing supplies from manifests. She even has the eye to guess which reports are falsified in the bureaucratic hell of an interplanetary empire. While there is no pattern of some cluster of targets that are repeatedly hit for silent thefts, there is a pattern of perfect spread. True randomness would have some duplication, and Dedra is able to read this as intentional non-randomness.

The evidence we leave behind aren’t just our footprints but where there are no footprints at all. For example, in today’s society it’s more suspicious to have no presence on the internet than an extremely dull presence. Everyone in a milieu turning their phones off right as they reach a certain part of the woods is itself a signal. When we try to leave no trace, it can be better to leave a false trail than no discernible trail at all.

While the rebels are taking a break on the way to the Imperial garrison, Arvel holds a knife to Cassian’s neck and takes the gem Luthen had given him as a down payment for his services as a mercenary. He holds it up as vindication of his suspicions that Cassian isn’t who he says he is. After listing off all of “Clem’s” incongruities, Arvel says “I need to know who I’m riding with.”Tensions rise, and Vel diffuses the situation saying they’ll talk about it at camp.

Cassian admits he’s being paid, and says he doesn’t want to walk in looking over his shoulder. He then calls out Arvel for losing his nerve about the mission and latching on to something to deflect his fear. If he can’t admit he’s too afraid to do the mission, he can find something that’s wrong enough to make aborting the only logical choice.

We too fall into this trap. It’s easier to turn our sights inward where the only consequences are words than to carry out actions that could potentially derail our lives. Sometimes we do this under the alleged auspices of security culture, but this misuse of the processes of OpSec to justify our fears harms not just a current action but security culture at large. Nitpicking about perfect adherence to some tenets of social justice or calling everyone you haven’t known for a decade a possible cop is almost always easier than doing the work, especially the scary work. This isn’t to say we should do as Arvel does and work with mercenaries that just got dropped on us, but we should ask ourselves if we’re attacking and over-scrutinizing fellow travelers out of genuine concern or if it’s away of avoiding what needs to be done without ever having to admit our own fears.

In the previous episodes as the rebels traveled and trained in the mountains near the garrison they planned to rob, they lived and dressed as the local Dhani. Even as Cassian and three of the other rebels made their way to the garrison, they were clothed in their imperial uniforms but with the large overcoats and caps atop them. As Cassian has pointed out, and as we see from the officers’ perspective inside the base, the Empire has no regard for the people it oppresses to the point it doesn’t think of them as a threat. Fournon-native civilians walking the mountains would be suspicious, more so four random imperial soldiers. But four shepherds is something that would barely register with them.

As much as dressing punkly or flamboyantly might be our means of expressing identity of actively challenging norms of presentability, it has its time and place. For clandestine actions, black bloc can be counter-productive. The so-called “normie bloc” or “gray bloc” can be extremely effective at avoiding detection or infiltration. You might use it to get to a demo before blocking up, or you can use it to get inside an event you’re not permitted. The nature of your plan might guarantee detection, but it’s better that happen at the last possible second, and how we dress is often the first giveaway that we do not belong.

After the heist, Cassian sits outside a hovel with Arvel while Vel stays inside with Nemik who is receiving medical care. Arvel suggests that he and Cassian take the ship and run, lay low, then split the credits and live richly. He admits to having lied about his brother being driven to suicide by the Empire and that his “rebellion” is just him versus everyone else no matter who he has to climb over. Cassian shoots him, then goes inside to tell Vel what happened. She doesn’t believe him and even seems surprised that Cassian only asks for his agreed upon cut instead of walking off with the whole load.

Arvel knew, like many cops and intelligence agents know, that one of the easiest ways to deflect suspicion of being an impersonator is to pin it on someone else. We see this play out online often where accusations of not really being into social justice are most often flung by people who do wildly unacceptable things. In our anarchist spaces, some of the people who are the loudest about stamping out abuse might themselves be abusers. This isn’t to say that every person—or even most people—who aggressively look for abusers or infiltrators are that thing themselves. It’s just not a guarantee that they aren’t.

Mon visits Luthen under the guise of returning what she’d previously purchased so she can ask him if he was behind the attack on Aldhani. Mon is upset that Luthen acted on his own while she was still trying to find means of subtly moving funds from her monitored accounts. She tells him that she was doing everything she could, to which he retorts “Your ‘everything’ seemed tobe all about bringing in a savior to access your family funds.” When Luthen goes on to explain that the network is built and that all weapons are eventually used, Mon counters that the coming repression will hurt many. Luthen, a bit of an accelerationist, says that this is necessary part of the plan. Mon leaves upset, and Kleya says to Luthen “I hope she’s worth it.”

Mon and Luthen have very different appetites for personal risk or violence in general. At the end of E05, right be fore the heist takes place, Luthen asks Kleya if her walk-away bag is ready. Conversely, when we first see Mon with Luthen in E04, when they talk about upcoming actions, she says:

“Don’t lecture me on vulnerability. No one’s more at risk than I am. You think I haven’t thought this through? I’d be the first one to fall.”

She might think she’s highly vulnerable because she’s highly visible and actively surveilled, but she’s not carrying out the actual deeds that lead to deaths. In part, her luxurious lifestyle leaves her with more to lose, and it shields her from the knowledge of the constant suffering of those living under the Empire’s heel.

OpSec isn’t about security in the sense of safety, but about minimizing risk while still achieving one’s goals, and this last part is key. Often we see individuals or so-called leadership in organizations put the protection of themselves over achieving goals. Revolution might be a goal, but if they only want it to happen if they can guarantee their safety, they do not actually want revolution. They want revolution with the caveat that its coming to pass does not harm them.

While this zine—and much else I’ve written—focuses on how to be secure, we must remember that if one’s “security” is too “good,” we will achieve nothing.

Vel returns to Coruscant and radios for a meeting with Kleya. Kleya follows some chalk markings to a location, and the first thing she does is criticizeVel for making contact and also herself for showing up. After covering some logistics, Vel asks about her lover Cinta. Kleya replies “Receiving messagesis just as dangerous as sending them.” She’s speaking about herself but also about Cinta.

Communications that have an clear sender and receiver—namely digital and postal comms—can be dangerous for both parties. One careless message from the sender can fully implicate the receiver in a crime carried out or even the tangential “conspiracy to commit X” charges. It can lead to increased surveillance of the individual even if they’re not involved in the crimes at all. If not fact that two parties conversed, the content of a message can be worrisome. One members of an affinity group texting in the group chat “who’s making molotovs?” even if no one responds can have serious consequences. Sometimes it’s best to send no messages at all.
