---
title: "Declaration Before the Assize Court"
author: "Georges Étiévant"
date: "2016"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georges-etievant-declaration-before-the-assize-court"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Source: Déclarations devant la cour d’assises. Éditions de L’Idée Libre, Conflans-Honorine, 1920; Translated: for marxists.org by Mitchell Abidor; Translated: by Mitchell Abidor; CopyLeft: Creative Commons (Attribute &amp; ShareAlike) marxists.org 2009. Retrieved on 2016-10-28 from http://marxists.a"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "georges-etievant-declaration-before-the-assize-court.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georges-etievant-declaration-before-the-assize-court.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Though I am a major criminal, it is no less true that I did no harm to anyone as long as I was left in peace. I worked as long as possible without bothering anyone, and I in all ways respected the rights and liberty of all. Volney said in “Natural Law”: “Preserve yourself, educate yourself, educate others.” and though Volney wasn’t an anarchist, since I didn’t see anything in this aphorism that was bad or prejudicial to anyone I put it in practice as best I could. I worked not only for myself, not only to preserve and educate myself, but also to educate others. And so, considering that all natural phenomena are connected by numeric relations, the evening come I studied math in order to be better able to delve more deeply into the great problems that nature never ceases posing man, and to thus make myself more capable of spreading the truth. All this to say that I considered it an obligation to express my way of thinking on all matters both facts and theories. But since unfortunately despite my constant efforts my capacities are weak, I spent more time in growing than in using them and, in general, I abstained. In fact, in the three months during which I enjoyed relative freedom I never once spoke in public and I only wrote two articles. But though I know of the existence of the laws qualified as “villanous” – I don’t really know why, since in my opinion they all are – I was so persuaded that everyone has the right to freely express his thoughts, whatever they might be, especially while respecting those of others, that I always signed my articles, never using a pseudonym. Such was my life for three months. Now, suppose there were only rascals like myself in the world, working, studying, honestly expressing their ideas without their convictions needing to be manifested because of the thirst for gain, as is generally the case with the honest press and, finally, while respecting the rights and freedom of all, as I did. Suppose, I say, that there was no longer a single honest man, nor magistrate of integrity, nor brave general, nor honorable deputy; finally, not a single honest man. Tell me then what ill would be the results for humanity? Even though I had done harm to no man, it is no less clear that things could not go on in this way. Where would we be headed if it were possible to not have the same opinion as the leaders; if it were possible to raise one’s voice for some other reason than that of joining in the choir of thuriferaires of the social order we have the good fortune of living under; if one could defend with impunity the defeated, the weak, those who are the victims of laws, and this with the aggravating circumstance of doing it for nothing, purely from conviction, without these unfortunates having a millionaire family to support them? It was scandalous! Not only to not cry out against the ignorant, but to go so far as to claim that if the unfortunate Aliboron gave a few good kicks to those who want his death that this act of revolt would be an act of legitimate defense. Yes, I went so far as to say in an article that every act of revolt is an act of legitimate defense. This was intolerable and even more intolerable because there was no way of demonstrating the contrary. I could accept this if I’d emitted an absurd idea that could have been refuted, but I allowed myself to be right. Such an act of daring couldn’t go unpunished, for I was obviously wrong to be in the right and they made me see this by condemning me to end my days in the swamps of Guyana. But by some mischance it happened that that didn’t please me, and the demonstration of my errors not having seemed clear and peremptory to me I didn’t care to allow myself to be killed without defending myself. This was certainly a signal evil which all the lovers of order had to find scandalous . If those who decreed that all those individuals who don’t think like them about certain facts should be put in prison or sent to the penal colonies in the name of freedom, eq…
