---
title: "Fire-ants and flower"
author: "Michael Schmidt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/michael-schmidt-fire-ants-and-flower"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Revolutionary anarchism in Latin America and the lessons for South Africa"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "michael-schmidt-fire-ants-and-flower.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/michael-schmidt-fire-ants-and-flower.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       THE SOCIAL QUESTION        ANARCHIST DAYS 2: BRAZIL        BRAZILIAN & ARGENTINE ANARCHISTS & THE SOCIAL MOVEMENTS        FOR A FRONT OF OPPRESSED CLASSES        SOCIALIST “GOVERNMENT” FROM BELOW        FIGHTING DIFFERENTLY TO ACHIEVE DIFFERENT ENDS        POST-SCRIPT: ILS MEETING The most crucial issue facing the global anarchist movement today is not only how to win the battle for the leadership of ideas among the anti-capitalist movement, but how to ensure that direct action, mutual aid, collective decision-making, horizontal networks, and other principles of anarchist organising become the living practices of the social movements. We will examine the examples of Latin American anarchist organisations to see how they ensured what they call “social insertion” — that they as militants and revolutionaries are at the heart of the social struggles and not mere (cheer-)leaders in the margins. This is a core question not only because it demands a definition of the role of the revolutionary organisation, but also because it focuses on how revolutionary anarchists define their relationship with non-anarchist forces originating in the struggles of the working class, peasantry and the poor. To put it another way, the key is how we approach the oppressed classes and how we contribute towards the advancement of their autonomy from political opportunism, towards the strengthening of their libertarian instincts and towards their revolutionary advance. Globally, the working class has changed dramatically since 1917, an international revolutionary high-water mark, when South African anarcho-syndicalists (anarchist unionists) of all “races” like Thomas Thibedi, Bernard Sigamoney, Fred Pienaar and Andrew Dunbar founded the first black, coloured and Indian trade unions in South Africa. Today, trade unions, the old “shock battalions” of the working class are decimated, compromised or bogged down in red tape. The once-militant affiliates of Cosatu have been silenced, restructured, bought off with investment deals and enslaved to their “patriotic” duty to support the ANC elite. The inevitable resistance to the ruling class’ neo-liberal war on the poor has provoked resistance. But although the new phase of struggle began with the SA Municipal Workers Union fighting a water privatisation pilot project in Nelspruit, it swiftly moved beyond the unions. Today, most observers agree that together, the progressive United Social Movements (Landless People’s Movement and Social Movements Indaba) embrace about 200,000 supporters — compared to the SACP’s 16,000 seldom-mobilised membership. Which is why the regional anarchist movement, in founding the Zabalaza Anarchist Communist Federation on May Day 2003, has oriented itself towards anarcho-communism that goes beyond the factory gates. Anarcho-communism has its ideological origins in the Pan-European Revolt of 1848 and the writings of house-painter Joseph Dejacque, who opposed the authoritarian communism of his contemporary Karl Marx. But it only really became a genuine mass working class movement within the First International. Essentially, it is the practice of social revolution from below rather than political socialist revolution from above, and it calls for a movement located in the heart of working class society. Of course there are conservative, right wing and even proto-fascist forces within the majority-black oppressed classes, which hobble their ability to challenge the elite. Which is why anarchists, autonomists and other anti-authoritarian socialists are directly involved in the progressive social movements. Since the dark period of opposition to apartheid in the 1980s, the southern African anarchist movement has, because of language barriers, largely drawn inspiration from the North American and Western European movements and far less from our comrades in the rest of Africa, Eastern Europe, Asia, Austral-Oceania and Latin America. But social, economic and political conditions in the glob…
