---
title: "Anarcha-feminist pedagogy"
author: "Sonia Muñoz Llort"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sonia-munoz-llort-anarcha-feminist-pedagogy-collaborative-and-emancipatory-learning-in-inclusiv"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Collaborative and emancipatory learning in inclusive environments"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sonia-munoz-llort-anarcha-feminist-pedagogy-collaborative-and-emancipatory-learning-in-inclusiv.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sonia-munoz-llort-anarcha-feminist-pedagogy-collaborative-and-emancipatory-learning-in-inclusiv.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Education as a liberation process, just relying on rationality?        Anarcha-feminist pedagogy, a practical pending action in educational systems, anarchist organizations and movements        Liberation for whom? Anarcha-feministic pedagogy meets Disability Pedagogy        Building up practical answers to expand anarchist pedagogies. Short remarks to enhance mutual aid and emancipation in education and in society        Sources Anarchists know that a long period of education must precede any great fundamental change in society, hence they do not believe in vote begging, nor political campaigns, but rather in the development of self-thinking individuals. — Lucy Parsons, 1890 Judith Suissa’s overview about philosophy of anarchistic pedagogy in her book “Anarchism and Education” gives a great overview about the main principles in anarchist education. Many of these principles, such as freedom, holistic approach to learning process and anti-hierachical and anti-authoritarian praxis independetly of state organizing are very much needed nowadays. At the same time, as an anarchist pedagog myself, I wonder if there is a pivotal point we have to expand to make anarchist pedagogies more inclusive and more grounded in mutual aid principle and praxis. It is not just in the classroom we must include people, but also in daily revolutionary processes. In her book, Suissa names rationality as a predominant factor in order to understand and analyze the oppressive systems around us at a cognitive level, but also as the prerequisite for being able to be an active person to participate in new social structures outside the capitalist system. In the anarchist tradition, rationality can be a potential factor for exclusion, not only from the classrooms but from the permanent revolutionary process related to life-long learning. Many might still think that in order to learn and being active learners, we must rely exclusively on rationality. Rationality in psychology is seen as high cognitive functions, which allow us to complex processes in analyzing and managing spoken and written information and later in decision-making. This is partly correct, but the whole picture in what processes are important to learning points at much more combined processes that includes also emotions, communication with our surroundings and more biological factors such as regular sugar levels in our blood or good mental health. An overweight in cognitive function leaves many individuals apart in the construction of open inclusive societies. Where is the diversity and how can be build free and just societies if some people are not included? It is imperative that we include modern knowledge around learning processes, not only as individuals, but as collectives where we need to adapt and expand our principles and praxis to make our movements and organizations inclusive. Emancipation has to be for all, and emancipation must go beyond our trust on pure rationality in order to contribute to new social structures. An issue that has largely been misused against women and non-conforming gendered people is actually our lack of rationality as a sign of not being able of making decisions for ourselves or for the collective good. Here can we find a huge intersection where ableism, racism, mysoginy, homophobia and transphobia meet. In this intersection is where anarcha-feminist educators must find the tools to deconstruct the oppressive mechanisms that support not only gender roles, but other types of classifications that diminishes people and excludes us from revolutionary processes. The purpose of this bloggpost is not to give a final answer to what anarcha-feminist pedagogy is. This is just a concept I came up with in order to expand and reevaluate the principles of anarchist pedagogy. Most theorists who have been given weight in anarchist pedagogies are men, which is fine but very narrow. We are all influenced by our own perceptions and experiences, and we can be sure that this…
