---
title: "Anarchist Meditations, or: Three Wild Interstices of Anarchism and Philosophy"
author: "Alejandro de Acosta"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alejandro-de-acosta-anarchist-meditations-or-three-wild-interstices-of-anarchism-and-philosophy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, Volume 2010.1"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alejandro-de-acosta-anarchist-meditations-or-three-wild-interstices-of-anarchism-and-philosophy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alejandro-de-acosta-anarchist-meditations-or-three-wild-interstices-of-anarchism-and-philosophy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Failure and the Third        Dramatization: Wild Styles        First Wild Style: Daydream        Second Wild Style: Field Trip        Third Wild Style: Psychogeography        Interstices        References Philosophers allude to anarchist practices; philosophers allude to anarchist theorists; anarchists allude to philosophers (usually in search of theory to add to the canon). What is missing in this schema, I note with interest, is anarchists alluding to philosophical practices. These are the wild interstices: zones of outlandish contact for all concerned. Todo está ya en su punto, y el ser persona en el mayor. Conocer las cosas en su punto, en su sazón, y saberlas lograr. — Baltasar Gracián I dare to call certain turbulent interstices of anarchy and philosophy wild . I feel that there is a lot of activity there, but not (yet) along predictable lines. For some time now, those interested have been hearing about several other such interstices: tamer ones, from my point of view. Or at least more recognizable. So let us play the familiar game of theory and practice, that game in which we presuppose them as separate and seek to claim them reunited. From within the play of this game, the tame interstices are variations on the following moves: philosophers allude to anarchist practices; philosophers allude to anarchist theorists; anarchists allude to philosophers (usually in search of theory to add to the canon). What is missing in this schema, I note with interest, is anarchists alluding to philosophical practices. These are the wild interstices: zones of outlandish contact for all concerned, I think. But there are other games to play, even if they are only innocent games of exposition. I think it is important and interesting to stop presupposing separation, to dissolve its painful distribution of thinking and action. That is, we might hazard the risky game (which is also an experience, an exercise) in which there are no theories, no practices; just more or less remarkable enactments of ways of life, available in principle to absolutely anyone, absolutely anywhere. [1] Anecdotally, these reflections have a double genesis. The first occurred some years ago, when I was asked at an anarchist gathering to participate in a panel on “anarchism and post-structuralism.” It was around the time some began speaking of and writing about post-anarchism. The conversation failed, I think, in that no one learned anything. Of the four speakers, two were roughly in favour of engaging with post-structuralism and two against. I write roughly because we seemed to agree that “post-structuralism” is at best an umbrella term, at worst a garbage term, not acknowledged by most of the authors classed within it, and not particularly helpful in conversations such as that one. As if there really were two massive aggregates on either side of the “and” we were being asked to discuss! Indeed, the worst possible sense that something called post-anarchism could have would be the imaginary collusion of two crudely conceived imaginary aggregates. During the discussion, a participant asked the panel a question: “how do post-structuralist anarchists organize?” Of course the question went unanswered, though some of us tried to point out that there just aren’t, and cannot be, post-structuralist anarchists in the same sense that there are or may be anarcho-communists or anarcha-feminists or primitivists, etc. The operative reason was that our interlocutor seemed to be (involuntarily?) imagining post-structuralism as a form of theory, and anarchism primarily as a form of practice with no spontaneous or considered theory of its own. This is a variant of the familiar schema of separation, in which theory offers the analysis that informs practices, a.k.a. “organizing.” No go. That night, I also posed a question, one that went unanswered: “is there a third?” I meant to ask both about the status of anarchism and post-structuralism as massive, clumsy imaginar…
