---
title: "Constitution"
author: "Wild Rose Collective"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wild-rose-collective-constitution"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on December 6, 2013 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wild-rose-collective-constitution.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wild-rose-collective-constitution.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Article 1: Name The name of the organization is the Wild Rose Collective Article 2: Membership Membership is open to individuals who: agree with the Principles and Purpose of the organization abide by the Constitution agree to work and argue for the organization’s policies in their public political activity attend at least two meetings every two months pay dues No one may become a member or remain a member who is an employee or agent of a law enforcement agency. Members must be approved by a 75% majority vote of all members in an official meeting of the organization. A member who violates the constitution or acts contrary to the interests of the organization may be expelled. The member must be given one month’s notice prior to the meeting where the issue will be discussed, where they will be given an opportunity to offer a defense. Expulsion requires a 75% majority vote of all members. Article 3: Organization Official meetings are routinely held every two weeks. Quorum for an official meeting is 51% of all members. The agenda for an official meeting is composed of items members send to the secretary. The secretary sends out the agenda three days prior to an official meeting. The secretary and the moderator should be in communication about the agenda. Decisions are made by a 75% majority vote of members present at a meeting. Any business not included in the agenda sent out by the secretary can be included in a meeting with a majority vote of members attending. However, decisions made on late added business are considered provisional decisions for three days after the minutes are distributed, so that members unaware of the agenda item can vote on the matter. The provisional decision becomes official when 75% of members who choose to vote approve it. Members who did not attend the meeting and who do not reply within three days are considered to have abstained. The secretary takes minutes of all official meetings, and sends them to all members; preferably within three days of an official meeting. Article 4: Policy Official policy is the organization’s Principles, Purpose, and position papers. Votes to change the Constitution, Principles, Purpose or position papers of the organization require a 75% majority vote of all members. Position papers are divided into a general section and a short term section. The general section contains the theoretical position of the organization on the question. The short term perspectives section outlines the organization’s policy on immediate questions and the tactics we intend to implement. Minorities who disagree with any policy or members who wish to act on an issue for which no policy exists, have the right to act as they see fit as long as they make it clear that their position does not reflect that of the organization, and as long as such a position does not take them outside of the constitution. Article 5: Positions All positions are elected and can be recalled by the usual decision-making process. A member may not hold more than one position at a time. Terms last six months. Positions should rotate each term unless circumstances do not allow it. Elections are held the last meetings of December and June, with terms beginning January 1 st and July 1 st . Members unable to fulfill their position’s obligations may request that a replacement be elected to finish their term. Moderator – The moderator facilitates meetings, maintaining and guiding the decision making process. They are also responsible for welcoming new people, and for explaining how to become a member to those who are interested. They are responsible for finding a substitute if they cannot attend a meeting. Secretary – The secretary puts together the meeting agenda from items received from members, and sends it to members three days prior to the meeting. They are responsible for booking a meeting room and assuring that required materials are available for the meeting. The secretary takes minutes during meetings, and sends them to me…
