---
title: "Church power in the south..."
author: "Des McCarron"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/des-mccarron-church-power-in-the-south"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Home rule or Rome rule?"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "des-mccarron-church-power-in-the-south.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/des-mccarron-church-power-in-the-south.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Religious belief        A bit of history        The Church as Capitalists        Keeping in with the in-crowd        Kitty O’Shea        A new Ireland?        Is there a way out? THE CAMPAIGN to Separate Church and State have been busy. They’ve being taking a court case against the government for employing Chaplains in Vocational schools. The 26 county Constitution prohibits the state from “endowing” religion. Though we wouldn’t place much faith in the courts or De Valera’s Constitution ourselves we got to admit that they’ve got a point, paying for these 30 priests and ministers is costing the taxpayer £800,000-£1,000,000. However this is only the tip of the iceberg! The Catholic church in Ireland has always been massively supported by the State and allowed a huge say in the running of the country. This article will attempt to cover the facts of church power in Ireland and the long history of State support beginning hundreds of years be fore the establishment of the 26 county state. Firstly it must be made clear that we see religion as a personal matter. Everyone should be free to worship as they want and hold whatever beliefs they want. We condemn totally any attacks on an individual’s religious freedom. Equally we are opposed to any one telling us how to run our lives, including religious leaders. This article will hopefully show how organised religion works with State and bosses to oppress all whatever their personal religious beliefs. Within the Irish 26 counties we are referring of course to the Catholic church ...and now a brief history lesson. In 1951 Noel Browne, Minister for Health in the “inter-party” coalition government, intro duced his “Mother and Child Scheme”. This was a proposal for free gynaecological care for pregnant women and a compre hensive health programme for children up to 16. Following their Autumn meeting in Maynooth the Catholic bishops sent a letter to the government. “The powers taken by the State in the proposed Mother and Child health service are in direct opposition to the rights of the family and of the individual and are liable to very great abuse. Their character is such that no assurance that they would be used in moderation could justify their enactment. If adopted they would constitute a ready-made instrument for totalitarian aggression”(!) Such was the power of the bishops (helped by other conservatives and with the strong support of many wealthy doctors fear ing for their practices) that this tripe was sufficient to send Labour and Clann na Poblachta tripping over each other to catch up with Fine Gael in the “No” lobby. Noel Browne was forced to resign. The church’s fear of “totalitarian aggression” (i.e. communism) is of little surprise when you consider it’s material base in society. Recently (1987) the church’s total assets in Dublin alone amounted to £100 million, with an estimated income of £7.5 million per year. According to the Irish Independent (31/01/83) it owned 234 churches, 713 schools, 473 houses and 100 community centres in Dublin. In 1979 in the midst of appalling poverty they spent £2.5 million on the pope’s visit. Needless to say the ordinary members of this company (i.e. the vast majority of Irish people) have no shares, and voting rights lie in the hands of a non-elected board of management: the Bishops. As well as it’s direct wealth, it has a massive amount of control in State institutions. They control 3,300 out of the country’s 3,500 primary schools despite the fact that all the staff wages and 90% of building costs are paid by the State. They also control 67% of secondary schools and own Maynooth College. They have a majority on the boards of most orphanages, ‘reform schools’ and hospitals. This allows them to veto even legal operations such as sterilisations in most hospitals. The Catholic church has always known which side it’s bread was buttered on. It worked hand in glove with British imperialism (while engaging in a little nationalist posturing to main…
