---
title: "Does the Unabomber have any relevance to anarchism?"
author: "Theo Slade"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theo-slade-does-the-unabomber-have-any-relevance-to-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2025-10-13 from &lt;www.thetedkarchive.com/library/does-the-unabomber-have-any-relevance-to-anarchism&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "theo-slade-does-the-unabomber-have-any-relevance-to-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theo-slade-does-the-unabomber-have-any-relevance-to-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction      1953 — Ted becomes a primitivist      1971 — Ted misreads the minimalist anarchist Jaques Ellul      1979 — Ted writes to Wild America      1985 — The Unabomber’s First Public Primitivist Argument      1990 — Earth First! shifts with the times      1992 — The Earth Liberation Front emerges        Eugene      1995 — The Manifesto is Published        Zerzan Promotes Ted’s Message        Other anarchists critiques his message      1996 — Ted begins corresponding with various anarchists post-arrest      1997 — More Zerzan promotion      1998 — Ted has the same message post-arrest        Commando Unabomber Faction      2001 — An ELF cell debates similarly violent acts against people for the wild      2003 — A similarly violent insurrectionary network emerges with many anticiv cells      2006 — Ted publicly breaks with anarchism      2010 — Similar insurrectionary violence emerges in Mexico in a big way      2011        Environmentalist sabotage groups begin to label their attacks ELF/ALF/FAI, to emphasis the total liberation ideals motivating their attacks.        Individualists Tending to the Wild emerges        The group’s origins broadly        Kaczynski’s influence specifically        Other anarchist actions inspired partially by Kaczynski      2012 — Various eco-anarchist actions reference Ted K as a source of inspiration        Logging corporation sabotaged in solidarity with Ted K        Greek anarchist anti-tech cell quotes Ted K        An anticiv cell in Russia calling itself ELF share their support for FAI & ITS      2013 — Electrical substation attacked      2016        Ted’s book ‘Anti-Tech Revolution’ is published        Cars burnt under the umbrella of ELF/FAI      2019 — Ted disavows any identification as an anarchist      The Future        The limits of violence To begin with, I think Ted K sincerely identified as an anarchist in the 1990s at least. His first letter to the media, in June 1993, began with the words: “We are an anarchist group calling ourselves FC.” A later communiqué from April 1995 repeated: “We call ourselves anarchists.” The Manifesto discusses “our particular brand of anarchism”. Also, for many years after his arrest his message remained fairly consistent: “the social ideal I would put forward is that of the nomadic hunting-and-gathering society.” [1] Plus, that: “after the techno-industrial system has been eliminated, people can and should fight injustice wherever they find it.” [2] But, in terms of answering the deeper question of ‘does the Unabomber have any relevance to anarchism?’ I think Wayne Price said it best when he answered in the following way: [3] First, I answer “No.” His views have nothing in common with my views on anarchism. And even the most misguided anarchist bomb-throwers and assassins of the past would not have killed professors and students. But I also say “Maybe.” His views are similar to those of many anarchists: the lack of interest in developing a strategy for popular revolution; the belief that the enemy is industrial technology; not building an organization; not participating in popular struggles, but acting as an elite above the people; the worship of violence, abstracted from popular struggle; a willingness to impose their views on the people, even while denouncing as vanguardist those who try to persuade people. Perhaps I could add: an ambiguity about democracy, seeing anarchism as for freedom versus democracy, rather than as the most extreme form of democracy. All these concepts are reflected in the Unabomber’s letters and actions and are also held by various trends within the anti-authoritarian movements. No doubt the Unabomber will be used as an excuse for denouncing anarchism. The movement would be wise to prepare by having open discussion about him and his methods. As much as some Kaczynski fans would like to claim that the number of people who are curious about Kaczynski is a sign of a burgeoning movement, I think for the most part inte…
