---
title: "Errico Malatesta and Revolutionary Violence"
author: "Alfredo M. Bonanno"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfredo-m-bonanno-errico-malatesta-and-revolutionary-violence"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published by Elephant Editions 2011. Chapter: “Malatesta e il concetto di violenza rivoluzionaria” published in Errico Malatesta, A centocinquant’anni dalla nascita, Atti del Convegno anarchico, Naples 5-6-7 December 2003, Edizioni la Fiaccola, Ragusa 2007, pp. 118–134. Retrieved on 2020-04-1 from a"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alfredo-m-bonanno-errico-malatesta-and-revolutionary-violence.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfredo-m-bonanno-errico-malatesta-and-revolutionary-violence.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introductory note      Errico Malatesta and Revolutionary Violence      Notes for the Conference on Malatesta      Spoken intervention This talk of mine at the anarchist conference on Malatesta in Naples, December 2003, is a perfect example of how any attempt to justify or condemn the concept of revolutionary violence is a failure from the outset. Revolutionary violence has no need of my justification and cannot be affected by any kind of condemnation, even if it comes from the ranks of the anarchists themselves. Pacifism is also basically a non-issue and does not deserve to be refuted in too many words. My effort did not, nor does it here, intend to provide arguments supporting revolutionary violence. It just wanted, and still does, to make a contribution to the revolutionary ideas and activity of Errico Malatesta. Many unwarranted things have been said about this anarchist who all too often has been enlisted under the banner of whatever side or even party. Like all true revolutionaries, Malatesta did not bother to sort through his papers, he addressed problems as they occurred in reality, always ready to look for evidence in the social conflict rather than in a theoretical syllogism. The social war continues, revolutionary violence is only the most immediately perceptible expression of its operativity, not the only or, in some respects, even the most important one. I commend these pages to the attention of the reader. Make good use of them, but don’t expect of them what they cannot give. The most important appointment is always on the barricades. Alfredo M. Bonanno Trieste, November 26, 2008 I am not a historian, so I shall not talk like a historian. My interest in Malatesta goes back more than thirty years when I edited the annotated edition of Anarchy. The reading of the best known writings of Malatesta and the anthology edited by Richards [1] had attracted my attention. To my amazement I found myself faced with an anarchist who did not use the accommodating common sense of those who want to make themselves understood by the masses on the one hand, or the flamboyant language of those who feel the influence of the literary and philosophical avant-garde without admitting it on the other. Malatesta gave me the impression of being a man who was well-informed, but without any arrogant intention to impress the listener. But it was his language that impressed me most of all. Simple and effective. Its quiet yet compelling reason. In the face of a Galleani that filled my head with an affected din or a Schicchi that made use of rhetorical effects that I could do without, Malatesta appeared to be a practical man, a revolutionary who wanted to destroy but also to build, who possessed considerable knowledge but did not want to show it off when there was no need for it. Upon closer reading of his writings I found myself reflecting upon the processes that lead to the construction of a leader. Nothing in Malatesta calls for this unfortunate designation, yet the behaviour of his comrades, far more than that his opponents, put him in this uncomfortable armour. I remember reading somewhere of an Italian Lenin, but my recollection might not be exact so I do not want to stress the unfortunate comparison. However, I must point out that even in the poster drawn up to publicise this conference it is written of Malatesta that ‘he was one of the most famous revolutionaries of his time’, as if that could be of any interest to those who want to approach his work today (but also then). Fame is stuff of power, it is constructed and used by it. Our task—or so it seems to me—when approaching a comrade, whoever he is, who has ‘done’ or ‘thought’ (interesting the difference, if any) more or less than many others, is certainly not to start off from his fame, which we should leave to the muddled articles of newspapers or history books aimed at asserting the supremacy of the victors, or to the police files. The fact is that many people, I am not saying a…
