---
title: "Abolition, Ecology, and Afrofuturism"
author: "Nsámbu Za Suékama"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nsambu-za-suekama-abolition-ecology-and-afrofuturism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Some Thoughts"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nsambu-za-suekama-abolition-ecology-and-afrofuturism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nsambu-za-suekama-abolition-ecology-and-afrofuturism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

“Is not this the kind of fasting I have chosen: to loose the chains of injustice and untie the cords of the yoke, to set the oppressed free and break every yoke?” — Isaiah 58:6 For several decades, many Black activists and others have advanced an intensified focus during August on the struggle of our incarcerated family. It was especially in recognition of the spirit in which many Black revolutionaries have operated, and for which they were/are persecuted by the State. Says Shaka At-Thinnin, Black August Organizing Committee in “THE ROOTS OF BLACK AUGUST”: “Each year officially since 1979 [when it was launched] we have used the month of August to focus on the oppressive treatment of our brothers and sisters disappeared inside the state run gulags and concentration camps America calls prisons. It is during this time that we concentrate our efforts to free our mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers, uncles, aunts, and all other captive family and friends who have been held in isolation for decade after decade beyond their original sentence. Many of these individuals are held in the sensory deprivation and mind control units called Security Housing Units (S.H.U. Program), without even the most basic of human rights.” Of particular interest to me this year is the August 21st National Prison Strike, the first of which was coordinated in 2016 as the largest organized prison strike, and which commemorated the Attica Prison Rebellion of 1971. Called for and being led by those inside the system and their allies on the outside, an intro to the press release for the strike reads as follows: “Men and women incarcerated in prisons across the nation declare a nationwide strike in response to the riot in Lee Correctional Institution, a maximum security prison in South Carolina. Seven comrades lost their lives during a senseless uprising that could have been avoided had the prison not been so overcrowded from the greed wrought by mass incarceration, and a lack of respect for human life that is embedded in our nation’s penal ideology. These men and women are demanding humane living conditions, access to rehabilitation, sentencing reform and the end of modern day slavery.” There are other significant dates for Black August, such as the death of Michael Brown which sparked the Ferguson Uprising, or the dragging of captive Afrikans to Jamestown in 1619. They cause us to focus on the politics of abolition, which is essential when talking about Black radicalism. Blackness (and other codes for ‘non-white’ people) is also psychically associated with the idea of ‘criminal’ no matter what. It is now well established that prisons and policing target Black communities for politico-economic gain, their roots traceable on one account to forces established to protect settler rights/claims to ‘property,’ (including Black humans kept as chattel), and the trinity of convict leasing, debt peonage, and the black codes after Reconstruction aimed at preserving the slaveocracy despite on paper claims of emancipation. Addressing mass incarceration and the prison system in general, and by extension the police state and the entire legal system of the United States is essential to Black liberation. Black August is our time to meditate on, fast for, and develop our praxis around that fact. As Mumia Abu Jamal once said: “[Black] August [is] a month of injustice and divine justice; of repression and righteous rebellion; of individual and collective efforts to free the slaves, and break the chains that bind us.” “The earth dries up and withers, the world languishes and withers, the heavens languish with the earth. The earth is defiled by its people … Therefore, a curse consumes the earth; its people must bear their guilt. Therefore earth’s inhabitants are burned up and very few are left.” — Isaiah 24:4–6 While fasting, shouting about, and studying more intensely the question of Abolition this month, I have felt moved to point out an aspect of the struggles our incarcerated fa…
