---
title: "A People's History of the United States"
author: "Howard Zinn"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/howard-zinn-a-people-s-history-of-the-united-states"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-04-13 from https://libcom.org/library/peoples-history-of-united-states-howard-zinn"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "howard-zinn-a-people-s-history-of-the-united-states.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/howard-zinn-a-people-s-history-of-the-united-states.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     1. Columbus, The Indians, and Human Progress      2. Drawing the Color Line      3. Persons of Mean and Vile Condition      4. Tyranny is Tyranny      5. A kind of Revolution      6. The Intimately Oppressed      7. As Long As Grass Grows Or Water Runs      8. We Take Nothing by Conquest, Thank God      9. Slavery Without Submission, Emancipation Without Freedom      10. The Other Civil War      11. Robber Barons And Rebels      12. The Empire and the People      13. The Socialist Challenge      14. War Is the Health of the State      15. Self-help in Hard Times      16. A People's War?      17. "Or Does It Explode?"      18. The Impossible Victory: Vietnam      19. Surprises      20. The Seventies: Under Control?      21. Carter-Reagan-Bush: The Bipartisan Consensus      22. The Unreported Resistance      23. The Clinton Presidency and the Crisis of Democracy      24. The Coming Revolt of the Guards Arawak men and women, naked, tawny, and full of wonder, emerged from their villages onto the island's beaches and swam out to get a closer look at the strange big boat. When Columbus and his sailors came ashore, carrying swords, speaking oddly, the Arawaks ran to greet them, brought them food, water, gifts. He later wrote of this in his log: They ... brought us parrots and balls of cotton and spears and many other things, which they exchanged for the glass beads and hawks' bells. They willingly traded everything they owned... . They were well-built, with good bodies and handsome features.... They do not bear arms, and do not know them, for I showed them a sword, they took it by the edge and cut themselves out of ignorance. They have no iron. Their spears are made of cane... . They would make fine servants.... With fifty men we could subjugate them all and make them do whatever we want. These Arawaks of the Bahama Islands were much like Indians on the mainland, who were remarkable (European observers were to say again and again) for their hospitality, their belief in sharing. These traits did not stand out in the Europe of the Renaissance, dominated as it was by the religion of popes, the government of kings, the frenzy for money that marked Western civilization and its first messenger to the Americas, Christopher Columbus. Columbus wrote: As soon as I arrived in the Indies, on the first Island which I found, I took some of the natives by force in order that they might learn and might give me information of whatever there is in these parts. The information that Columbus wanted most was: Where is the gold? He had persuaded the king and queen of Spain to finance an expedition to the lands, the wealth, he expected would be on the other side of the Atlantic-the Indies and Asia, gold and spices. For, like other informed people of his time, he knew the world was round and he could sail west in order to get to the Far East. Spain was recently unified, one of the new modern nation-states, like France, England, and Portugal. Its population, mostly poor peasants, worked for the nobility, who were 2 percent of the population and owned 95 percent of the land. Spain had tied itself to the Catholic Church, expelled all the Jews, driven out the Moors. Like other states of the modern world, Spain sought gold, which was becoming the new mark of wealth, more useful than land because it could buy anything. There was gold in Asia, it was thought, and certainly silks and spices, for Marco Polo and others had brought back marvelous things from their overland expeditions centuries before. Now that the Turks had conquered Constantinople and the eastern Mediterranean, and controlled the land routes to Asia, a sea route was needed. Portuguese sailors were working their way around the southern tip of Africa. Spain decided to gamble on a long sail across an unknown ocean. In return for bringing back gold and spices, they promised Columbus 10 percent of the profits, governorship over new-found lands, and the fame that would go with a new tide: Admiral of …
