---
title: "An Interview with Anarchists in the ’48 Area"
author: "The Commoner"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-commoner-an-interview-with-anarchists-in-the-48-area"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 20 March 2024 from thecommoner.org.uk/an-interview-with-anarchists-48-area"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-commoner-an-interview-with-anarchists-in-the-48-area.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-commoner-an-interview-with-anarchists-in-the-48-area.epub"
    hosted: false
---

This interview was conducted with several members of the Israeli anarchist group, anarchyin48. We have edited their responses and, where possible, merged their replies to get a general overview of the plurality of backgrounds and perspectives within the organisation. The group would also like to note that their name may only be temporary . You can find the group on Instagram . Tell us a bit about anarchyin48 and how your group got started. We are still not an official sort of group. For now, we are just a few anarchists with hopes and dreams of creating something like [the anarchist communist group] “ Ahdut ” that was in Israel/Palestine a couple years ago. One of our comrades created this Instagram page along with another anarchist memes page. They started uploading pics of them from demos waving ancom [anarcho-communist] flags with some other individuals. We also participate in other leftist groups like Food Not Bombs , Standing Together , and even the Fauda movement in Palestine. We met some friends, some of whom either were or are already in radical movements, and we decided that anarchists in Israel should unite and work together. That’s why we decided to start publishing anarchist content in the media and to come to demonstrations with flags. Little by little, other small groups of activists are forming. In response to this answer, we asked the group how they felt about calls to boycott Standing Together as an organisation that promotes the “normalisation” of Israel. To which they responded: It is really a problem that Standing Together does not have a clear position on Zionism. This is part of their want to be a popular organisation. It is a shame that this had led to the “normalisation” of Zionism. People abroad do not know that there is also post-Zionism and not just Zionism or anti-Zionism, many on the Israeli left are post-Zionists, meaning they want Israel to exist but not as a Jewish state. In my opinion, post-Zionism is trying to eat cake and leave it intact because to be “a different Israel” it cannot be Israel, since the essence of Israel is Zionism. How would you describe the ethnic and religious background of the folks who make up anarchyin48? How do these backgrounds influence your activism? We’re mostly atheists; we have Mizrahis and Ashkenazis. Many of us are Jews from post-USSR countries, so they are familiar with communism and anarchism. We also have some Palestinian comrades who oppose Zionism and authoritarianism and think this region must have something new which is not fundamentalist or statist. [One member speaks personally]: I grew up in a religious Jewish home and after a while I left the religion. I grew up in a religiously conservative and fascist environment, and this influenced me and shaped my views, which are very much against this way. What does day-to-day organising look like? What are your priorities? For now we just go to protests against the genocide in Gaza, wave anarchist flags together, and photograph ourselves with our faces censored. But we do have plans for when we have more people, like making our own bloc at protests and communicating with more anarchists and anti-authoritarian leftists in the land. For now, the idea is to succeed in reaching as many organisations/individuals as possible and to cooperate with them, invite them to demonstrations against the occupation and the war, and thus establish contact with them and organise actions. We are also working on a Telegram channel called mash’hirot through which we distribute radical content and expose the public to anarchist views. What is the landscape of anarchist groups around Israel? Are you networked with anarchist groups like Radical Haifa ? We are not connected with Radical Haifa, but one of us knows the founder who states it is not active anymore (though they are still doing what they can as an individual). For now we are just bringing flags and are coming to protests organised by the radical bloc , “ Looking the Occupati…
