---
title: "CREEKER: Volume 3"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-creeker-volume-3"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://creekerzine.wordpress.com/2022/10/21/creeker-volume-3/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-creeker-volume-3.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-creeker-volume-3.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Will We Win? Ada’itsx as a point of struggle By carlo      Rebellious Initiatives: Sometimes the Best Way to Defend is to Attack Resistance to coal mining on vancouver island by anonymous      Fairy Creek Fanfare      Necessary Actions by anonymous      Worth More Standing? Experiences of Disability Justice, Ableism, Community Care and the unfortunate lack-there-of on the frontlines of Ada’itsx.      Because I’m in Love by Will Falk      Embedding Embers      Forest Defense in Atlanta      Direct Action: Three Excavators Scorched in Atlanta Forest      Concerning the Destruction of Long Engineering Vehicles      Poem by an Animal in the Weelaunee Forest      A Tour of the Forest      Boyette Brothers Equipment Rental Service Machines Set On Fire      Report Back on the Fight Between Milsap/Dozer/Cops and Forest Defenders      The Truck Became an Attraction      Brassfield & Gorrie Site Attacked      Alta Vista Office Smashed in NYC      A Quote from the Stop Cop City Documentary So much has changed since that hot summer day in Ada’itsx. I was relaxing by a small waterfall deep in the forest when my friend lying beside me casually asked if I think we will win. An easy enough question but an elusive answer. As I thought about it I picked up a small stone and tossed it in the water. Fumbling around the question got me thinking deeper about what it was we were actually doing. The limits of what is possible and the limitless potential of possibility. Are we trying to save the old growth? Are we standing up against Canadian colonialism? Are we fighting back against capitalism and its extractivist plundering? Who are we to even find ourselves in this position to weigh these questions? A few years earlier at an anti capitalist demonstration, I found myself running down a side street escaping an onslaught of riot cops. A spray painted message read, “Freedom lies in the moment a stone is thrown.” Out of breath I smiled. Yes of course it’s about the last of the old growth, that’s what started the conversation. More precisely though, it is Canadian colonization that started this whole process. To pretend otherwise plays into the nationalist mythology of the Canadian State. It is a layered conversation and an unspeakably brutal process. Intersectional realities and contradictory experiences have all played their role in putting us in the here and now of Ada’itsx. It still begs the question though of where we are trying to go; where are we trying to take this struggle; what exactly are we trying to “win”. A bit of tokenistic legislation tinkering that saves the trees but leaves the colonial power structures firmly in place only strengthens the Canadian State. An empty land sort of reasoning that protects the flow of profit derived from exploitation, injustice, and subjugation. It’s an effective hustle by state and corporate gangsters to keep everyone looking the other way both socially and geographically. Ada’itsx represents an idea in motion, but only action informs it. The conversation would be nothing without action; the process of business as usual grinds if not for grassroots direct action. Successes, failures, and contradictions that shape us as both individuals and a collective, also shape our course of action. The State is acutely aware of this and is doing everything in its power to extinguish our capacity for action. Its counter insurgency strategy pursues full spectrum domination that ranges from the raw violence of police and company thugs, to the more subtle manipulations of the popular narrative and our sense of self. We need to push back against Ada’itsx being framed as a limited localized issue; we need to be vigilant against smiling eco-politicians intent on bringing us back into the fold of acceptable politics; and we need to be careful we don’t start betraying one another over one choice of action or another. Our hope lies in our uncompromising spirit and in our collective solidarity. The answer to what it is we are …
