---
title: "FAU and IWA — looking back to look ahead"
author: "FAU, Freie Arbeiterinnen- und Arbeiter-Union"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/international-secretariat-of-the-free-workers-union-fau-fau-and-iwa-looking-back-to-look-ahead"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Emal Ghamsharick. www.fau.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "international-secretariat-of-the-free-workers-union-fau-fau-and-iwa-looking-back-to-look-ahead.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/international-secretariat-of-the-free-workers-union-fau-fau-and-iwa-looking-back-to-look-ahead.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Formation of the IWA in 1922 and rebirth in the 1970s        The split in the Spanish CNT and the works council question        Crisis in the CNT-F — good-time problems        The crisis in Italy        Prohibitions and distrust instead of cooperation        The sorcerer’s apprentice        The FAU and i2002        The “FAU Act” — dictatorial powers for the IWA Secretariat        Should we stay or should we go now?        Final act of the tragedy        A new project in difficult times In December 2016, the IWA, formerly the International of revolutionary syndicalism and anarcho-syndicalism, expelled its sections in Spain (CNT), Italy (USI) and Germany (FAU), thereby losing at least 90% of its members. The decision at the IWA congress in Warsaw came as no surprise. It concludes at least 20 years of agony for an IWA which has gradually abandoned its roots and the principles of its foundation in December 1922. This text represents the view of the International Secretariat of the Free Workers’ Union of Germany (FAU) on the development of the IWA and the fault lines of the past decades. We relied several times on two current posts on the blog “Amor y Rabia,” because we couldn’t have said it better. Although we are sad about this break in our history with the IWA, we still hope that new opportunities for a more open project will arise. A project with a new outlook connecting — or even uniting — revolutionary syndicalists, anarcho-syndicalists and unionists worldwide. This might help overcome old divisions and this momentary split. The IWA was founded as the International of all revolutionary-syndicalist and anarcho-syndicalist unions in Berlin in 1922. In the early years, some of its member organizations had hundreds of thousands of members and very different approaches to unionizing. The organization was held together by mutual aid, a commitment to the “principles of revolutionary syndicalism” and trying to evade the influence of the emerging Leninist parties, who aimed to convert unions across the world into pawns of their party politics. Still the IWA’s influence on the history of the workers’ movement remained limited. During the Spanish revolution of 1936, the CNT — the largest IWA section with more than half a million members — did play a decisive role. But the defeat of all revolutionary hopes for a liberated society in Spain also accelerated the decline of the IWA. Many national sections had already been smashed during the rise of fascism throughout Europe and Latin America. The brutal hegemony of Leninism, followed by Stalinism, throughout labor unions worldwide increased the pressure. By the start of World War II, all IWA sections had been destroyed, save the Swedish SAC. The SAC also faced pressure in the early 1940s, but not from fascism, as in Germany, Italy and Spain. The Swedish government decided to task labor unions with managing pension and unemployment claims. The tacit goal was to force all workers into the toothless social-democratic union and to marginalize the SAC. Fearing this development, the SAC made a U-turn in 1942 and began to participate in managing the government’s social security funds. This included the creation of an official apparatus. It was not until 2009 that the SAC decided to re-radicalize most of its strategies. This was the backdrop for the 7 th IWA Congress in 1951, the first one in thirteen years and after WW II. The SAC’s strategic turn was heavily criticized for weakening revolutionary syndicalism by making the union an extended arm of government and as a pacification strategy against workers. As a result, the SAC stopped its membership payments to the IWA and opted to leave the International in 1957. The IWA thereby lost its last member to be an actual union. It began transforming into a federation of mere propaganda groups with no tangible influence on class struggles. The peak of the Cold War was a “march through the desert” for the anarcho-syndicalist move…
