---
title: "The Crisis That Keeps On Giving"
author: "Ron Tabor"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ron-tabor-the-crisis-that-keeps-on-giving"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Or, if the Aim of the Russians in Interfering in the 2016 Election Was to Throw the United States’ Political System into Chaos, They’re Sure Getting Their Money’s Worth."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ron-tabor-the-crisis-that-keeps-on-giving.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ron-tabor-the-crisis-that-keeps-on-giving.epub"
    hosted: false
---

By way of background, some anecdotes (in case you missed them):When, on their recent trip abroad, US President Donald Trump and his wife, Melania, arrived at Ben Gurion Airport in Israel after a flight from Saudi Arabia, Trump announced that he “just got back from the Middle East.” (Who says Trump is too ignorant to be president?) While walking on the tarmac to meet the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and his wife, Sara, Trump attempted to take Melania’s hand, but she swatted his hand away. Several female columnists in the US speculated that, like many wives, Melania despises her husband. The question for me is — does she despise him because he’s a crook, a liar, a bully, a bigot, a sadist, and amisogynist, or does she despise him because he’s making a fool of himself as president and therefore making a fool of her? While in Brussels, preparing for a photo op with the leaders of NATO, Trump rudely shoved aside the prime minister of Montenegro, Dusko Markovic, to force his way to the front of the group. He then primped and puffed himself up. This suggests that, despite his self-conception, Trump is more wannabe thug than the real thing. Real thugs, like Russian president Vladimir Putin, have “class”; they are polite and gracious in public. Putin doesn’t have to prove he has power; everybody knows it. Everybody also knows that, behind the pose, Putin has plenty of henchmen to do his dirty work. These days, Trump’s “henchmen” look more like The ThreeStooges. As part of his commencement address at the US Coast Guard Academy in New London, Connecticut, Trump complained that, “No politician in history has been treated worse or more unfairly.” As some of us know, more than a few politicians “in history” have been assassinated, executed, tortured (e.g., had their eyes gouged out and/or their limbs pulled off), imprisoned, exiled, and impeached, but none of this compares to the treatment Trump has received at the hands of his enemies, particularly the media. What an image of modesty, selflessness, and courage the president offered to the Coast Guard graduates, young men and women who, rightly or wrongly, are dedicating their lives in service to their country! Trump is currently deporting innocent people and breaking up families, threatening to deny healthcare and much-needed public services to millions of others. He has insulted entire ethnic groups, entire religious minorities, entire genders, the entire intelligence establishment, the entire general staff, the entire federal bureaucracy, the entire judiciary, and the entire media. But when they (surprise, surprise!) push back, all Trump can do is whine. CNN commentator, Van Jones, described Trump as having transformed from “Trumpzilla” to “President Snowflake.” Over one hundred students at one of the country’s premier Catholic educational institutions, the University of Notre Dame du Lac, outside of South Bend, Indiana, walked out of commencement ceremonies to protest the actions and policies of the keynote speaker, vice president and former Indiana governor, Mike Pence. Organized by the student organization, WestaNDFor, the walkout was meant to protest Pence’s opposition to gay rights, his attempts as governor to prevent Syrian refugees from resettling in Indiana, his support for Trump’s travel ban, and his opposition to “sanctuary cities.” Pence wound up as the keynote speaker because thousands of students and faculty members signed a petition to university president Rev. John Jenkins insisting that Trump not be invited. Notably, in his own address, the Rev. Jenkins insisted that the rights of LGBT people be defended. Pence’s speech at commencement ceremonies at Grove City College, a Christian liberal arts school north of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, was also met by protests. When a group of around 200 middle school students from South Orange, New Jersey, visiting the nation’s capital on a field trip, bumped into House Speaker Paul Ryan in the Capitol, about half refused t…
