---
title: "Building Utopia"
author: "Stuart Christie"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/stuart-christie-building-utopia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Spanish Revolution 1936–1937"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "stuart-christie-building-utopia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/stuart-christie-building-utopia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     INTRODUCTION        Conclusion      July 1936        The Workers’ Victory        The Social Revolution        Collectivisation        The Social Revolution      August 1936        War or Revolution?      September 1936        The CNT joins the Generalidad      October 1936      November 1936        CNT entry into Madrid Government November 1936        Militarisation — November 1936        The Flight of the Government        Madrid — The Death of Durruti      December 1936      January 1937      February 1937      March 1937        Crisis of Generalidad Provoked      April 1937      May 1937        Tuesday, 4 May        Wednesday, 5 May        Thursday 6 May        Friday 7 May        The May Days — Aftermath      June 1937      July 1937      August 1937        The Council of Aragón      Background Briefs        Summer 1936: Why did we fail to take Zaragoza?        Period of hesitancy        From Barcelona to Zaragoza, a walk in the park, militarily?        Dream Time        Operation ‘Free Commune’: The Taking of Zaragoza        Fifth Column Jiggery Pokery        Planning Days        Days of Hope        DURRUTI’S ABSENCE, A DECISIVE FACTOR      Libertarian Communism      Collectivisations in Alcoy      Victor Blanco’s Story      The Question of Money      What Can We Do? (Camillo Berneri)      Sébastian Faure      The Problem of Militarisation        The Problem of Militarisation. To the comrades, to the confederal columns        The staffing and specialities of Companies, Regiments and Divisions and the formation of a single collective command for the Aragón front        On behalf of the Durruti Column:      Statement by Vivaldo Fagundes        Protest before the libertarians, of present and future regarding the capitulations of 1937 by an ‘uncontrollable’ from the Iron Column      Address by Federica Montseny, 3 January 1937      Militarisation — March 1937: Dissolution of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Councils      February 1937: Memorandum from War Committee of the Iron Column, 16 February 1937      April 1937 —An Open Letter to Federica Montseny      April 1937: Confidential letter from an agent of Negrín, 15 April 1937      May: Unpublished Letter to Max Nettlau from Emma Goldman      September: The international debate on war and revolution      “Catastrophic Revolution” by Brandt      Pierre Besnard’s reply to ‘ Catastrophic Revolution ′      June: Anarchist Intelligence and Security Services      The POUM: Trotsky and the POUM Within the Spanish anarchist and anarcho-syndicalist movements there were three distinct points of view on the question of war and revolution. The first, probably the majority view, was that the war would be over in a matter of weeks, after all, a few days had been enough to rout the army in Barcelona and other industrial centres, and that the social revolution and Libertarian Communism as debated and adopted by the CNT’s national congress at Zaragoza in February, five months previously, was an inseparable aspect of the struggle against economic and social oppression. Thus, the movement should proceed immediately to socialise the factories, the land and their communities. The second position was that held by members of the regional, national and peninsular committees of the CNT-FAI, the so-called ‘notables’, office holders such as such as Horacio Prieto, Mariano Rodriguez, Federica Montseny, Diego Abad de Santillan, García Oliver, etc. They anticipated a lengthy war and opposed implementing Libertarian Communism until the war was won. They opted instead for compromising alliances with the bourgeois Republican, Catalanist and Stalinist parties. Their argument was that such a strategy would prevent a situation developing wherein a victorious but exhausted CNT might be overwhelmed by another political force which had been more sparing with its forces ie, the Spanish Communist Party. It was a fatal strategy that quickly absorbed them, undermined their principles and transformed what had hitherto been…
