---
title: "Declaration of Émile Henry at his trial"
author: "Émile Henry"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/declaration-of-emile-henry-at-his-trial"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Statements made by Émile Henry during his trial for the bombing at the Café Terminus. The attack and the statement are significant elements in the history of anarchism and terrorism. Indeed, Merriman (2016:1–15), Badier (2010:164–171), and Ferragu (2019:21–31) see in this attack/declaration the firs"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "declaration-of-emile-henry-at-his-trial.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/declaration-of-emile-henry-at-his-trial.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Gentlemen of the jury, You know the charges for which I am accused: the explosion on Bons-Enfants street, that killed five people and led to the death of a sixth, the explosion of Café Terminus, which killed one person, led to the death of a second one, injured several others — at last, six revolver shots at those who were pursuing me after this last attack. Proceedings showed you I aknowledge to be the author responsible for these acts. Therefore, this is not a defence I am presenting to you. I don’t want, in any way, to escape the reprisals of the society I have attacked. Moreover, I recognize only one tribunal, myself; and the verdict of any other is irrelevant for me. I only want to give you the explanation of my acts, and tell you how came to commit them. I am an anarchist only recently. It wasn’t until mid-1891 that I joined the revolutionary movement. Before that, I had lived in circles totally imbued with prevailing values. I was habitued to respect and even love the concepts of fatherland, family, authority and property. But the teachers of this generation forget too often one thing: that life, with its struggles and iniquities, takes upon itself, being an indiscrete one, to open the eyes of ignorants and show them reality. This is what happened to me as it happens to all. They told me that life was easy and largely open to the intelligent and energetic, experience showed me that only cynics and servile can have a good spot in the banquet. They told me that social institutions were based on justice and equalty, and I saw all around me only lies and trickeries. Each day removed an illusion. Wherever I went, I was witness of the same suffering among some, the same pleasures among the others. I didn’t waste time realize that the grand words they had taught me to venerate: honor, devotion, duty, were only a mask veiling the most shameful wickednesses. The industrial who was establishing a massive wealth on the work of the workers, who, them, were left without nothing, was said to be an honest gentleman. The deputy, the minister whose hands were always open to bribes, were said to be devoted to public good. The officer who tested his new-model rifle on seven years old children was said to have done his duty, and in the middle of Parliament, the President of the Council congratulated him! Everything I saw revolted me, and my mind turned to the criticism of social organization. This criticism has been made too often for me to repeat it. I only have to say that I became the enemy of a society I considered criminal. For a time, I was attracted to socialism, I didn’t waste any in fleeing this party. I had too much love for freedom, too much respect for individual initiative, too much a repugnance to be incorporated, to accept a number in the regimented army of the Fourth Estate/State. Furthemore, I saw that — in essence — socialism doesn’t change anything to this order. It keeps the authoritarian principle, and this principle, whatever what some so-called freethinkers can say, is only a relic of the faith in a superior power. Scientific studies had gradually introduced me to the workings of natural forces. But, I was materialistic and atheist; I realized that the God hypothesis was pushed aside by modern science which didn’t need it anymore. Religious and authoritarian morality, based on falsities, had to disappear. But then, what new morality was in harmony with the laws of nature that had to regenerate this old world and give birth to an happy humankind ? It was at this moment that I was put in relation with some anarchist companions, that I still consider today as some of the best I ever knew. First, it was their character that attracted me. I liked in them their profound honesty, their complete frankness, their deep disdain of all prejudices, and I wanted to know the idea that made those men so different from the others. This idea found in my mind a fertile ground which was ready to receive it by my own observations and per…
