---
title: "The Goal of a Cadre Group is Class War"
author: "Joel Olson, Mike Kramer"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mike-kramer-and-joel-olson-the-goal-of-a-cadre-group-is-class-war"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This essay was written in response to various debates over the “Bring the Ruckus” document on an email list, particularly over the meaning of September 11 and the nature of white supremacy in the United States. Retrieved on 15th November 2021 from joelolson.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mike-kramer-and-joel-olson-the-goal-of-a-cadre-group-is-class-war.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mike-kramer-and-joel-olson-the-goal-of-a-cadre-group-is-class-war.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Terror and class war        Settlerism and class There have been two main discussions on the list recently. One has been over the September 11 events, the other over race traitor vs. settler analyses of white supremacy. Although these discussions have been independent of each other, for the most part, we would like to suggest that there is a common thread to them. Specifically, the argument that the September 11 events were justifiable attacks on an imperialist state and the argument that colonialism is the key to understanding race in the U.S. both lack a class analysis. We believe, however, that a class analysis is central to understanding the significance of the September events as well as the American racial order-and therefore to the building of a revolutionary cadre group. Further, we believe it is our position on class rather than on terrorism or white supremacy that fundamentally distinguishes our (Ruckus’s) politics from other positions taken on this list. The American left has shown a surprising lack of attention to class in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. This is evident in two common left responses to 9–11 and the war on Afghanistan. The first response is to denounce the United States government and detail its crimes against the Afghan people and Third World nations. These analyses are generally true; some of them are even useful (see www.counterpunch.org for the best of them). But ticking off a list of imperialist atrocities committed by the U.S. is not a class analysis, nor does it provide any insight on how to end this war-and begin the class war. This is evident in that this approach has failed to provide any alternative to current American antiterrorist policy other than to call for some vague and toothless international tribunal to indict Osama bin Laden and bring him to “justice.” The second position, expressed by several people on this list, is to assert that terrorism against the U.S. is a justifiable tactic against an imperialist state. As J- wrote on this list, “When the 3 rd world attacks the 1 st world I will always support the 3 rd world. When the poor attack the rich I will always support the poor. I will accept even the excesses of these attacks.” J-‘s post prompted a heated exchange on the list. Much of the debate focused on political violence and posturing, whether terrorism is a legitimate tactic, and whether the attacks killed elites or working people. We don’t think these are the fundamental issues. Generally, there is no “pacifism as pathology” problem on this list. Political posturing is also not what’s at stake here. Nor is the debate about the class composition of who was killed. Poor people always die disproportionately in wars, even just ones. Instead, we believe the key issue is class. Specifically, those who see the September 11 attacks as justifiable aggression against an imperialist state lack a class analysis of the forces attacking the U.S. and express a deep skepticism that the American working class will ever have revolutionary potential. Terrorism is random attacks on civilians with no intention to achieve power or gain a military advantage. Its function is precisely to terrorize. It may or may not be performed by a state; thus it includes Israel’s actions in the Gaza Strip and the U.S. bombing of Iraq as well as Al Qaeda’s recent attacks. The problem with terrorism from our perspective is that it usually stems from either the lack of a mass base by the organization carrying it out or an anti-humanitarian impulse that reflects the organization’s reactionary politics. The Symbionese Liberation Army launched attacks and kidnappings in the U.S. with the intent of promoting class struggle, but they were driven to engage in terrorism because they completely lacked a mass base for their politics. Al Qaeda, on the other hand, clearly represents a mass base, but their politics are more akin to fascism than to revolutionary struggle. This is evident not only in their pol…
