---
title: "Ba Jin as Anarchist Critic of Marxism"
author: "Daniel M. Youd, John A. Rapp"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-a-rapp-daniel-m-youd-ba-jin-as-anarchist-critic-of-marxism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Contemporary Chinese Thought, 46:2, 3–21, DOI: 10.1080/10971467.2015.1003017. ISSN: 1097–1467 (Print) 1558–0997 (Online) Retrieved on 27th April 2021 from dx.doi.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-a-rapp-daniel-m-youd-ba-jin-as-anarchist-critic-of-marxism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-a-rapp-daniel-m-youd-ba-jin-as-anarchist-critic-of-marxism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Guest Editors’ Introduction        Ba Jin’s Reputation and Value as a Writer: Coda to Guest Editors’ Introduction        Acknowledgments        Bibliography          Original Essays by Ba Jin Criticizing Marxism and Leninism          Ba Jin Translations of Western Anarchist Critiques of Soviet Russia          Select Western Language Sources on Ba Jin and Anarchism Abstract: This introduction provides background and analysis of Ba Jin’s anarchist essays criticizing Marxism and Leninism, with a coda on Ba Jin’s value and reputation as a writer. This issue of Contemporary Chinese Thought is devoted to the early anti-Marxist writings of Ba Jin (1904–2005: birth name, Li Yaotang; courtesy name, or hao , Feigan). Of course, Ba Jin was one of China’s most famous modern writers, especially for his novel Family (Jia), [1] which played a huge role in shaping the political attitudes of Chinese youth during the 1930s. That he was also a committed member of the worldwide revolutionary anarchist movement from the 1920s to at least the 1940s is fairly well known by many of his readers outside China. [2] In fact, he developed his pen name by combining the Chinese characters for the surnames of the two most famous Western anarchists: Ba, from the Chinese transliteration of Michael Bakunin (Ba-gu-ning), and Jin, from the name for Peter Kropotkin (Ke-lu-pao-te-jin). [3] That he called himself a follower of Kropotkin and considered the American anarchist Emma Goldman his “spiritual mother” may also be known by those who study his works. What may be less well known, even by readers outside China, is that as part of his commitment to the anarchist cause, Ba Jin became very aware of the long-standing anarchist critique of Marxist communism and participated actively in the anarchist–Marxist debates in China during the 1920s, writing several articles directly critical of the Marxist theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat, Lenin’s style of rule, and the repressive policies of the Bolshevik state in general. [4] In fact, as late as the 1930s and 1940s, many of his translations of foreign anarchist writings included letters and essays by Kropotkin, Emma Goldman, and Alexander Berkman (see below) that were critical of the Bolshevik regime from a Left-anarchist perspective, and he wrote forewords and/or afterwords to some of these translations in which he expressed his own opinions critical of communism. [5] These anti-Marxist writings got Ba Jin into trouble during the early years of the Great Leap Forward (1958–1960) and the Cultural Revolution (1966–1976), the two periods of Maoist ascendancy in China, when he was denounced for his past anarchist views (see below). Ironically, Chairman Mao was himself an anarchist in his youth and thus was also very aware of the anarchist critique of Marxism. Indeed, Mao may have tried to answer that critique in his later attacks on the “new class” in the Communist Party during the Cultural Revolution, [6] even as he himself and Party ideologists under him denounced anarchism in the typical Marxist fashion as the ideol-ogy of the petite bourgeoisie. [7] Although Ba Jin followed this line in 1959 by renouncing his anarchism and criticized himself for not “hav-ing the courage to join the Communist path,” he was nevertheless persecuted again during the Cultural Revolution for his anarchist past, most famously in a public denunciation meeting in Shanghai in 1968 where he was forced to kneel on glass. [8] One could argue that by attacking the one known anarchist within the PRC (People’s Republic of China) cultural elite, the radical Maoists may have tried to protect themselves against the charge of themselves being influenced by what Marxists would call that “petit bourgeois,” potentially counterrevolutionary tradition. [9] In any case, after 1949, even before his full official renunciation of anarchism, Ba Jin removed the anarchist characteristics of his heroes and heroines in his novels, short stories, and bi…
