---
title: "A Critique of Alternative Money Theories"
author: "Amelie Lanier"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/amelie-lanier-a-critique-of-alternative-money-theories"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A talk delivered at the Anarchist Congress in Berlin April 11, 2009 Retrieved on August 2, 2009 from www.ainfos.ca"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "amelie-lanier-a-critique-of-alternative-money-theories.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/amelie-lanier-a-critique-of-alternative-money-theories.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1. Exchange        2. The universal equivalent: money        3. State paper money        4. Gesell’s criticism of money, property and interest          4. 1. The backing of money          4. 2. Against ground rent, interest and income without labor          4. 3. Commodity production: a fundamental human right          4. 4. Money as cash, intermediary for commodity exchange        5. Token money — local money as “the answer”          a. Worgl          b. Argentina          What service did they have? Silvio Gesell was one of the few theorists of anarchism who dealt with economic issues. He was a kind of model for Keynes, who explicitly referred to him. Today, in view of the financial crisis, many people reflect back on him. This is reason enough to offer a critical assessment of him. First of all, however, I will talk about what money is. The market is where commodities are exchanged. Whoever wants to buy something in the market — whether its a small, local one or the big world market or e-Bay — must simultaneously give something else for it. He also must have something that he can exchange. If he has nothing, he can also get nothing. He cannot satisfy what needs he always has. At the same time, we have a system of property which excludes most people from any opportunity to produce something. Most people have no land on which they could grow anything. They do not have a workshop in which they could put something together. They do not even have a house or a hut in the woods where they could live. In order to access food, housing or consumer goods commercially, they must give something for it — nowadays it is money. However, it would not be any better if all kinds of exchange objects were admitted or asked for on the market because they also do not have them. Most people are simply excluded from any possibility of creating something useful. There are many explanations for why there is starvation in the world. They are all wrong. Among other things, because they ignore this basic equation: in order to get something, you have to give something. They mention logistical and distribution problems, nature and its quirks, human greed and corrupt officials, or an unjust world order in which one side overeats and the other thus does not even get the bare minimum. If such reasons are accepted and acknowledged, exchange and the principle of ownership are politely left out: they can not be the reason. Often just a better exchange policy, a “fairer” access to this very global market is recommended for the food problems of humanity. You no longer have to look at the the Third World, the countries of the periphery, to find hunger. There are, as you can see from the media, in the centers of our world order, even here in Berlin, lots of people who have difficulties feeding themselves properly. For example, schoolchildren who have nothing to eat at home and are supplied with food in school and by food banks. And these social conditions are not ignored, everyone knows them. But one can also bring up such truly outrageous conditions unperturbed because everyone who reads about this or sees it on television is convinced that exchange and ownership are necessary, and that nobody would produce if they were not then afterwards satisfied with an equivalent. The media can be sure that nobody starts to doubt our economic and social system, but only calls for initiatives to make this condition manageable. So I attach great importance to the fact that exchange is a form of exclusion because today, in view of the fact that money has fallen somewhat into disrepute, many critics of our social system see the solution to all these problems in a return to a type of barter economy, or to a means of exchange which is not money, but some other useful object. I will also point out that before colonialism there were many societies and economic forms which knew nothing of exchange, and where the people were somehow well fed and clothed. Many of the indigenous m…
