---
title: "Earthbound Farmers' Almanac & Food Autonomy In Bulbancha"
author: "Hadley, B, M, The Final Straw Radio"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-final-straw-radio-m-b-hadley-earthbound-farmers-almanac-food-autonomy-in-bulbancha"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Printed in Return Fire vol.6 chap.5 (spring 2023). To read the articles referenced throughout this text in [square brackets], PDFs of Return Fire and related publications can be read, downloaded and printed by visiting returnfire.noblogs.org or emailing returnfire@riseup.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-final-straw-radio-m-b-hadley-earthbound-farmers-almanac-food-autonomy-in-bulbancha.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-final-straw-radio-m-b-hadley-earthbound-farmers-almanac-food-autonomy-in-bulbancha.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[ed. – This concerns the publication in recent years of the Earthbound Farmers Almanac, and the project of some of its producers, Lobelia Commons. The latter is interesting in that it grew as a mutual aid project from out of a specific struggle (that against the sad legacy of pipeline atrocities in the Gulf South of the so-called United States; see Return Fire vol.1 pg28 ). Yet, despite the tendency of such projects – important as they are – to become pacified (see Return Fire vol.5 pg10 ), the focus here is on strengthening a base from which subversion of alienated social relations not just grow but spread, and strengthen the struggles in turn which birthed them. (Figuring out how to perform such a trick – see Return Fire vol.3 pg59 – is a key challenge for radicals, especially in the Global North.) Moreover, when talking of realising commons (see 'The Principle of Reciprocity' ) and gift economies (see Return Fire vol.5 pg53 ), Lobelia Commons highlights the importance of joyful projects that nourish us. For more great examples of anti-authoritarian projects blurring the line between sabotage and so-called "self-sufficiency", see Peter Gelderloos' 'The Solutions are Already Here' (also regarding themes mentioned here of connecting rural projects with cities and vice versa, to avoid the more isolating parts of each.] T he F inal S traw R adio : Could you all please introduce yourselves with any relevant information that you’d like to share: who you are or where you are, preferred pronouns, etc.? M: I am M., I use he/him, and I am in southwestern Mississippi at the moment, but I bounced between southwest Mississippi and New Orleans, aka Bulbancha. B: I am B., they/them are my pronouns. I’m also bouncing back and forth between Mississippi and New Orleans. Hadley: And I’m Hadley and I use they/them pronouns. I’m also bouncing in and out of New Orleans. But I’m located west of New Orleans, I live in a project called the Ndn Bayou Food Forest. That is a propagation and free plant nursery. TFSR: Cool. Do you mind if I ask a couple of clarifying questions? Can you talk about that food propagation project a little bit, Hadley, anything you’d want to share, any way that people can learn more about that? Sounds pretty cool. H: Yeah, totally. It actually grew out of the campaign against the Bayou Bridge pipeline. And folks may be familiar with its earlier incarnation, the L’eau Est La Vie [Water is Life] camp. In that same location, basically, after the pipeline was finished, which was rerouted around the camp to avoid the conflict, but currently runs next door to the Food Forest. This is the fourth year of it as a farm project, basically, and the goal was to take this land that had started as a point of conflict against petrochemical infrastructure in the Gulf South and then pivot from that point to looking towards some regenerative future. We found that the strategy that we could do with this place was to just use it as a little base to propagate as many fruit trees to give away as possible. So a lot of the trees that Lobelia Commons, which we’ll also be talking about, plants in New Orleans, are propagated here, or another rural space that we’ll probably talk about also. TFSR: There’s obviously, depending on how close you are, blowouts from pipelines are a danger that’s one of the things that has brought people into the streets or into the swamps, in this case, to block the construction of these large pipelines. And also, they tend to leak. Are there any fears of that? Or have you been trying to work around that in terms of propagating food plants in that area? H: Oh, yeah, it’s definitely a concern. Thankfully, we aren’t particularly near to a valve station, or a pump station, which is where the majority of smaller pipeline leaks happen. If there were to be a major blowout all we can do is hope that it’s not in the little section of the 165-mile pipeline that we’re at. But we do also understand that we’re surrounded by a lot of other…
