---
title: "Building a Revolutionary Anarchism"
author: "Colin O"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/building-a-revolutionary-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This piece originally appeared in Perspectives on Anarchist Theory, No. 27 (2014) published by the Institute for Anarchist Studies. zabalazabooks.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "building-a-revolutionary-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/building-a-revolutionary-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Building a Revolutionary Anarchism Speaking Tour        Discomfort with Ideological Organisation in the US        Anarchism in Argentina        Especifismo        The Specific Anarchist Organisation        Developing Theory and Strategy        Social and Political Levels of Organising        Social Insertion and the Relation between the Social and Political        Social Movements Need Us        We Need Social Movements        Revolution, Counter-revolution, and Lessons Learned        A Question of Scale and Timing        Class Struggle Anarchist Network and Beyond This article speaks on the failures of the anarchist movement to grow, despite numerous social movements, and how models of anarchist political organisation point the way forward to overcome these pitfalls. Two recent events have thrown critical challenges at the anarchist movement in the United States: the financial crisis that began in 2008 and the Occupy Wall Street (OWS) movement that sprung from that crisis in 2011. If the current political and economic outlook in this country is any indication, we should expect more frequent moments like these to arise. “Movement Moments” such as these are critical opportunities for revolutionaries of any variety, left or right. Acceptance of the status quo seems impossible. Two recent events have thrown critical challenges at the anarchist movement in the United States: the financial crisis that began in 2008 and the Occupy Wall Street (OWS) movement that sprung from that crisis in 2011. If the current political and economic outlook in this country is any indication, we should expect more frequent moments like these to arise. “Movement Moments” such as these are critical opportunities for revolutionaries of any variety, left or right. Acceptance of the status quo seems impossible. OWS, in particular, presented an incredible opportunity for anarchism. It was largely propelled by anarchists, in many places sustained by anarchists, and certainly got many people talking about anarchism. In Mark Bray’s recent work Translating Anarchy: The Anarchism of Occupy Wall Street , he looks at the influence of anarchism among organisers in OWS and found: The interviews showed that 39% of OWS organisers self-identified as anarchists… I noticed that 30% of organisers who did not self-identify as anarchists (34% of all organisers didn’t identify with any overarching label) listed anarchism as an influential element in their overall thought. These Movement Moments don’t present themselves every day. It is essential for us to critically examine what our movement has gained, what it has lost, and what it needs to be stronger the next time that a Movement Moment happens. So, given the early influence of anarchism to OWS organisers, what was gained? In some places it seems that anti-foreclosure direct action groups have grown, in others the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) has seen growth in membership, and in general there is certainly a feeling that anarchist ideas are increasingly a part of the dialogue in many social justice movements. None are explicitly anarchist gains, though. While the direct action anti-foreclosure movement and the IWW obviously have some internal anarchist influence, neither is expressly anarchist and both often actively avoid a strong connection to anarchists. Bray concludes that Occupy Wall Street was a missed opportunity by anarchists: When I step back to evaluate the tangible political outcome for the anarchist movement after months spent before a world spotlight with thousands of eager new people beating the doors down to get involved, I get the sinking feeling that to some extent we too “glided through these events like ectoplasm through a mist.” We didn’t even have any competing leftist formations. The field of political influence was left open to us and we didn’t get as much out of it as we should have. Bray credits a lack of organisation as a key piece of this missed opportunity: A…
