---
title: "An Overview of Freedom"
author: "Carson Nøkke"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/carson-nokke-freedom-2"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "To the Capitalist"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "carson-nokke-freedom-2.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/carson-nokke-freedom-2.epub"
    hosted: false
---

You, capitalist! Upholder of the neoliberal system! Oh, how you cower in fear when us egoists, those who are unique, those who have no regard for your petty laws - that which hinders us - and no regard for your markets, your currency, your vain attempts at stopping us from true freedom - suggest that we must do away with everything I just mentioned, when just before you had the striking courage to suggest that your system is human nature! You fail to realize that what you are saying is contrary to reality. Egoism is innate to man! We desire and then we do! As much as I desire to write this to tell you that you are nothing but incorrect, you desire to defend your system! Just as much as the virulent atheist desires to prove his so-called correctness, the religious inherits his deity’s desire and act upon it to be pious! You are ill-informed to suggest that it is in our blood to be greedy - or, rather, your greed is no match for my greed, an enlightened greed, which desires not for some, not for what is allowed within some rules, not one that suppresses any sort of desire that transcends these rules and wishes for something more - the one that keeps you awake at night, eyes watering, heart racing, knowing there is, indeed, something more - but rather my greed thirsts for all and I do not silence it! You cling to your currency, your markets, your gods of false economy in some hope that it may free you and that you may be made happy by owning. But you fail to realize that you already own all, and all owns you, and everything owns everyone! Indeed we all own; the question is when shall we take it? When shall we reclaim from those who call themselves bourgeoise and proletariat, or slaves and masters, those who we detest for having the audacity to suggest that we are not individuals but rather slaves to some sort of binary. They limit our individuality as much as we limit theirs as long as we are complacent within the system - having rebellious thoughts but never once daring to expropriate or communize. The great limiter here is morality - not bourgeoise or master/slave, but just morality as a whole, as a barrier, as something we must happily yet mournfully bury as a thing of the past, as a non-objective non-reality. We have no regard for the master, the god, the religion of ethics - we acknowledge its reality within the individual, but we say resoundingly that even then it should be ignored. Ignore one intuition for that which benefits you and those you love! Here’s the catch: as egoists, we love everyone for it benefits us to love! The capitalist now attempts to explain to me that we have natural property rights - many a capitalist would say it guides our every personal ethic, or rather it should. But where does this so-called property right come from? The liberal responds that it comes from naturality. However, they fail to realize that rights are merely granted by a master, the master of a president, a minister, a king, a state, a god - ah, that old god, the old messiah which must dictate our every move. This old god is not limited to some epiphenomenal deity which has ascended us all, but rather many gods - the god of humanity, of law, of state, of morality. We reject all gods except for the god of one thing - that of the self. “Why do you reject one god for another? What hypocrisy!” says the self-proclaimed nihilist, proud cynic, when they are nothing but a clueless fool! We are nihilists but we have lost the need and desire to cling to some petty godless nihilism and instead ascended to a realm of nihil where the only thing acknowledged is the self’s desires, the desire to be unique above all - then the desire to love, to own, and so on. This is our god, and our realm, and we challenge anyone and everyone to tear town the indestructible self. The self, you see, is always present - at every moment. To paraphrase Stirner, even the slave under the harshest master is a self - every time he is lashed, he groans out of self, he does…
