---
title: "Burning Country"
author: "Leila Al Shami, Robin Yassin-Kassab"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robin-yassin-kassab-and-leila-al-shami-burning-country"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Syrians in Revolution and War"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "robin-yassin-kassab-and-leila-al-shami-burning-country.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robin-yassin-kassab-and-leila-al-shami-burning-country.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     List of Abbreviations      Acknowledgements      Preface      1. Revolution from Above      2. Bashaar’s First Decade      3. Revolution from Below      4. The Grassroots      5. Militarisation and Liberation      6. Scorched Earth: The Rise of the Islamisms      7. Dispossession and Exile      8. Culture Revolutionised      9. The Failure of the Elites      10. The Start of Solidarity      11. Syria Dismantled      Further Reading        Background        The Revolution        Culture        Aid Organisations        Monitoring, Advocacy and Campaigns        News Sites        Syrian Revolutionary Blogs and Websites (English Language)        Documentaries and Films We would like to thank all those, named or anonymous, who shared their stories with us. For various kinds of logistical help, we thank Razan Ghazzawi, Lina Sergie (Amal Hanano), Yassin al-Haj Saleh, AbdulRahman Jalloud, Wassim al-Adel and Olmo. For their reading and comments on sections of the text, we thank Hassan Hassan, Thomas Pierret, Yasser Munif, Rime Allaf and particularly Muhammad Idrees Ahmad. Our friend and trusty IT expert Al MacPhee of macpheeit.co.uk made the maps. We thank everybody at Pluto Press, most of all our editor David Shulman, who initiated this project as an act of solidarity with the Syrian revolution. His support throughout the process of researching and writing the book has been invaluable. And we thank Danny Postel, who organised a vast North American speaking tour for us, and hosted us in Denver, from the goodness of his heart. Bristol, June 2014. A compact old lady in red hair and a flowery dress is attending an evening of Syrian texts. As a description of Damascus is read out, she preserves her bright smile but begins nevertheless, quietly, to weep. Afterwards she comes up to talk. She’s a Damascene herself, she says. ‘I’ve lived in England for over thirty years, and I didn’t realise until the revolution that I had a fear barrier inside. Then I noticed I’d never talked about Syria. I’d tried not to even think about it. But those brave youths gave me courage; they gave me back my identity, and my freedom.’ This is where the revolution happens first, before the guns and the political calculations, before even the demonstrations – in individual hearts, in the form of new thoughts and newly unfettered words. Syria was once known as a ‘kingdom of silence’. In 2011 it burst into speech – not in one voice but in millions. On an immense surge of long-suppressed energy, a non-violent protest movement crossed sectarian and ethnic boundaries and spread to every part of the country. Nobody could control it – no party, leader or ideological programme, and least of all the repressive apparatus of the state, which applied gunfire, mass detention, sexual assault and torture, even of children, to death. Revolutionary Syrians often describe their first protest as an ecstatic event, as a kind of rebirth. The regime’s savage response was a baptism of horror after which there was no going back. Not silenced but goaded into fiercer revolt, the people organised in revolutionary committees and called not just for reform but for the complete overthrow of the system. Eventually, as soldiers defected and civilians took up arms to defend their communities, the revolution militarised. And then where the state collapsed or was beaten back, people set up local councils, aid distribution networks, radio stations and newspapers, expressing communal solidarity in the most creative and practical ways. For a few brief moments the people changed everything. Then the counter-revolutions ground them down. The regime’s scorched earth strategy drove millions from the country; those who remained in the liberated zones were forced to focus on survival. Syria became the site of proxy wars, of Sunni–Shia rivalries, of foreign interventions. Iranian and transnational Shia forces backed the regime; foreign Sunni extremists flocked to join the organisation known as ‘Islamic Stat…
