---
title: "Getting Rid Of Work"
author: "Gilles Dauvé"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gilles-dauve-getting-rid-of-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Here you will find a lightly modified chapter 3 from the book “From Crisis to Communization” published in 2017 by Editions Entremonde. Translated by EDICIONES INÉDITOS Retrieved on March 12, 2018 from https://ediciones-ineditos.com/2018/03/08/getting-rid-of-work/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gilles-dauve-getting-rid-of-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gilles-dauve-getting-rid-of-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       False construction sites        1. Rereading Marx: from Marx to Marxism        1.1 The commodity and work        1.2 Working in a world without money        1.3 The Map        1.4 Which definition of work?        1.5 Measuring by time (re-reading the Grundrisse )        1.6 Communism and labor time (the councilist project)        1.7 Does value abolish itself?        1.8 Marxist Marx        1.9 Marxism        2. Work and value        2.1 Whomever speaks of work speaks of classes        2.2 Work reduces all activity to a single substance        2.3 Wage laborers make of work a commodity        2.4 Work as separated activity        2.5 Work is productivity and accounting        2.6 Work is the reduction of everything to its minimum time        2.7 The society of king-labor        3. Neither work nor economy        3.1 Production is not economy        3.2 Communism as an activity What follows is a long essay by the French communization theorist, Gilles Dauvé. It is a long read, a read which varies in content and tone but a text which masterfully summarizes the communist critique of work. The original can be found here at Troploin. He also dutifully notes that without the abolition of work there can be no communist revolution or communism. We hope you enjoy reading this as much as we enjoyed translating it. ¡A la chingada con el trabajo! In 1997, in the French department of Sarthe, some 20 workers were constructing a section of highway under the direction of an engineer employed by a large company, BTP. After two months the engineer was arrested: no one had ordered the work that was partially done, which with an initial financing, the false construction site manager had successfully hoodwinked both banks and public organizations. Between 1983 and 1996, Philippe Berre had been convicted 14 times for ordering false construction sites. In 2009, “The Beginning,” a film inspired by this whole adventure was released, displaying a population struck by unemployment which briefly found work and hope. Phillippe Berre was not motivated by personal gain, but rather by the need to do , to be of use, to reanimate a group of workers. In 2010, once again, he took on this role while helping those affected by Cyclone Xynthia. We all know “rogue bosses.” Philippe Berre is a fictitious boss, an anti-hero for our times; at once a “manipulator of symbols,” an agile manager of human resources, at a crossroads between the automobile and the BTP (presented as the two principal employers within modern countries), wandering as a nomad on the highways, as mobile as the activities which he preyed upon, living on the ephemeral dreams that his dynamism created around him, an illustration of a fluidity without markers or attachments, where money flows but is not wasted, where success has no future, where one builds worthless things, where all appears as communication and virtuality. But is not a sense of reality which Philippe Berre is lacking, rather he lacks respect. When a crook brings work, revenue, and thus some “meaning” to a community in perdition, even if it is a provisional and false meaning, this raises the question – what does production and work mean? The unemployed at Sarthe trusted Philippe Berre because he brought them some socializing, a role, a status, a sense of being recognized. What is useful? Useless? Fictitious? Real? What is profitable or not? Was this piece of highway more or less absurd than any “real” highway? What work is worthy of being qualified as “a waste”? Beyond the hard reality of work (it creates objects, creates profit and is generally onerous), what is the truth? Marx has left us the most powerful synthesis of communism, one with the deepest theoretical breakthroughs and also the most acute contradictions. Capital and the The Critique of the Gotha Program notably, along with the Grundrisse , manuscripts from 1857-58, which have since renewed our approach towards capitalism and communism, and whose first publication in …
