---
title: "Down Graded Resistance: A Critique of DGR"
author: "Bobby Whittenberg-James"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bobby-whittenberg-james-down-graded-resistance-a-critique-of-dgr"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published on Veter(A)narchy on May 30, 2011. earthspiritandanarchy.blogspot.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "bobby-whittenberg-james-down-graded-resistance-a-critique-of-dgr.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bobby-whittenberg-james-down-graded-resistance-a-critique-of-dgr.epub"
    hosted: false
---

There’s been a lot of talk in anti-civ/primitive anarchy/deep ecology circles of late about a new organization called Deep Green Resistance and I haven’t really weighed in very heavily on it yet and after a few conversations I decided to throw my hat into the ring. If you are unfamiliar with DGR I recommend checking out their website ( http://deepgreenresistance.org ) before reading this. Don’t depend on my explanation of who and what they are. It’s better that you form you own opinion before engaging my critique. In reading through the intro, the (DEW), the Code of Conduct, the Statement of Principles and Why Do You Want Me to Sign the Code of Conduct and Statement of Principles, I found no critique of domestication, sedentaryism, technology, work, symbolic culture, mediating institutions, or agriculture and the only references to dismantling civilization specified industrial civilization. This abbreviated critique of civilization put forth by DGR may very well be a key reason for many of the problems within the organization’s framework, theory, and program. If one’s critique is sorely lacking, then most likely their resistance will be as well. Through their calls for democracy, hierarchy, organizing (as opposed to autonomous coordination), and leftist rhetoric they are an explicitly anti-anarchist group, so I’m not really sure why so many anarchists are rushing to their defense. This reminds me a good bit of red anarchists who are sympathetic to liberal or socialist parties or regimes. One of my initial concerns is the idea of organizationalism in general. It’s important to distinguish between organizations and groups or networks and between organizing and cooperating. We don’t need rosters and codes of conduct, programs, democratic rule, and recruiting to build a solid resistance. I think many times, as a result of our civilized minds, we tend to equate organization and standardization with expedience and effectiveness, with a quick and easy solution. This have proven not to be true on many occasions (The USA, National Syndicalist Italy, the USSR, North Korea.) We don’t need a quick and easy solution, we need an effective solution. A visit to their website starts out with their explanation of what Deep Green Resistance is. It starts off talking about the rise of civilization, the ineffectiveness of the mainstream activist scene, and building human communities inside of restored landbases. This is all good stuff. My first point of concern comes in the 5 th paragraph. “Industrial civilization can be stopped.” This, to me, is concerning because we went from talking about how the problem has been 10,000 years of civilization to stopping industrial civilization. Civilization and industrial civilization cannot just be used interchangeably. Opposition to civilization is opposition to all civilization. Opposition to industrial civilization is opposition to one type of civilization, which carries with it tacit approval of other types of civilization. My next concern comes in the next paragraph where it talks about the creation of “participatory institutions.” Shouldn’t the resistance against civilization be about the abolition of institutions, rather than their creation? Shouldn’t de-institutionalization be a part of an anti-civ resistance? A critique of civilization and authority certainly needs to include a critique of social institutions in general. “... any strategy aiming for a just future must include a call to build direct democracies based on human rights and sustainable material cultures.” Sustainability is definitely a necessary aim, but I’m curious about the rest of this. Anarchy is a condition of no rule with each individual having autonomy as opposed to democratic rule and a human rights model offered by civilization. Democracy is a form of rule, a form of government. There is an easily observable standardizing and homogenizing affect that comes with democracy. There must be a certain amount of uniformity to maintain so…
