---
title: "Anarchy in the YPG"
author: "Clare Maxwell"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/clare-maxwell-anarchy-in-the-ypg"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Foreign volunteers vow Turkish ‘revolution’"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "clare-maxwell-anarchy-in-the-ypg.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/clare-maxwell-anarchy-in-the-ypg.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       International volunteers form anarchist brigade with long-term plan to create democratic confederation across Turkey and Syria        Ocalan and Bookchin        American air support        Inclusive revolution International volunteers have called for a “revolution” across southern Turkey and northern Syria, after forming what they claim to be the first strictly “anarchist” contingent inside the Syrian Kurd YPG militia. The International Revolutionary People’s Guerrilla Forces (IRPGF), created in April, is a cell within the International Freedom Battalion, the grouping of foreigners who travelled to support the YPG in their fight against the Islamic State group. While they are by no means the first international volunteers to travel to northern Syria, their goals of a revolution within Syrian-Kurd area of “Rojava”, and the Kurd-dominated southern areas of Turkey, will alarm Ankara. Many within the IRPGF have committed to fight against the Turkish military and their allies, who entered Syria in August partly to neutralise the YPG as a threat on their southern border. Turkey views the YPG as an extension of the Turkish PKK, which has fought a decades-long war with the Turkish state. On Wednesday, the Turkish government said it could not accept a US decision to arm the YPG with heavy weapons to fight the Islamic State group. For anarchists, as well as other ideological volunteers in Rojava, this war is one front of an internationalist revolution, not merely resistance against IS. Whether or not the IRPGF will ever eventually fight in Greece, Brazil, Belarus or China remains to be seen, but they are definitely more than happy to find themselves on the front lines in Syria. Two members of the IRPGF, who go by the pseudonyms Heval Sores and Black October, agreed to speak with Middle East Eye about their experiences, and the role of international anarchists in Syria. “The IRPGF is the first major strictly anarchist formation in Rojava whose intentions are not only to fight in Rojava (which is at this point easy to do and legally not a big problem for Westerners) but to defend social revolutions around the world, to fight against the state and capital and advance the cause of anarchism around the world,” said Black October. “That means world revolution…while we are under the YPG’s authority and therefore legally in alliance with every group in the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) we want to make it clear that our politics and the revolutionary struggle are not simply confined to Rojava.” The US on Tuesday announced it was arming the YPG in its push for Raqqa. Turkey says every weapons delivered is a threat and according to IRPGF members, they are bracing for an eventual war with Turkey, in the hopes of uniting parts of Syria and Turkey into a confederalist entity. “We cannot declare war on everyone at once but we need to be smart in how we play our enemies while still sticking to our values,” said Heval Sores. Despite their internationalist viewpoint, both men felt drawn to Rojava, the YPG and its all-female counterpart, the YPJ as one of the most revolutionary political groups in the world. They had each spent time in anarchist and socialist organisations, but felt that life in YPG/J units was unique in its near total egalitarianism, ecological awareness and feminism. All the armed groups in Syria, including the IRPGF, are turning their focus towards the battle for Raqqa, the de facto capital of IS. Once that is over, however, priorities will change. According to IRPGF members, they are bracing for an eventual war with Turkey, in the hopes of uniting parts of Syria and Turkey into a confederalist entity. Until that war is over, IRPGF and the international Freedom Battalion are actively encouraging international volunteers to join them. “This is not the place to come to kill Arabs, Muslims or fight because Jesus told you so,” said Black October. “This is a revolution and we have no need for people like that. Not to mention the Ara…
