---
title: "Behind the Barricades"
author: "Jacqueline V."
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jacqueline-v-behind-the-barricades"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Scanned from original. Black &amp; Red Number 1, September, 1968, page 39"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jacqueline-v-behind-the-barricades.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jacqueline-v-behind-the-barricades.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Note in original: The following account was narrated to several co-workers of the first issue of Black and Red by Jacqueline V., one of the thousands of students who participated in the struggle in France last May.] The police entered the Sorbonne on the 3 rd of May and there was a spontaneous demonstration outside. The second step which was very important was the 6 th of May, when thousands of people demonstrated. On that day we were sort of going around wondering what we could do. The police were there. The student union had prepared a demonstration for 9 in the morning, and none of the union people were there. They said the demonstration was postponed to 6 in the evening, far from the student area. So everyone was surprised. Not everyone knew about it. There were thousands of people going around. They had never been in the street before and didn’t know what to do. At one point you could see a group singing the International” and walking right toward the cops. Of course when the cops took a few steps, they rushed back in all directions and it was obvious that something really bad could have happened--when you rush back and you have thousands of people behind, it can be a perfect mess. They were running in every direction, and there were cops all around. The cops had left a way to get in, but there was no possibility of getting out. All those people went around for hours and hours, and after a while they sort of concentrated and gathered around a large demonstration which went all around shouting slogans. The fight began about one in the afternoon, or thereabouts. Then people began to defend themselves. The policemen were coming and sending teargas and things like that. The students’ idea was to put a car in the middle of the street to prevent the cops from coming too quickly. It was spontaneous, you know, when you feel cops coming towards you; and we were not so numerous. We just pushed a few cars into the street, so there’d be something to keep the police from moving so quickly. This was obvious in the evening, when the official demonstration took place and went on peacefully without anything happening. Then suddenly, when we were on Saint-Germain, the police attacked, and began to throw tear-gas and all that. So of course there was a panic, a real panic, and people rushed back. Those who had been in demonstrations in 1961 and 1962 knew that if people just rushed back they could kill each other. The only thing there was to do was to push a few cars in the middle so that it wouldn’t be as bad. People took anything they could find. If there was a construction site in the street, they would tear off a few pieces of wood. Then the others had time to move back slowly instead of rushing back like mad. It started more or less like that. People took grills from around the trees and used them to dig up cobblestones on the street. They took the grills, and by hitting hard on the cobblestone street, they could separate stones. But when it was said that people came prepared, it just wasn’t true. Hardly anyone had anything in his hand when he went to the demonstrations. I even saw pictures of girls with heels and dresses. People saw the point of having these cobblestones. Of course there was all the past of Paris: the French Revolution, the Paris Commune; people had read about it. They began to make lines and to pass each other the cobblestones. Some of the stones would be used to throw at the police, and some would just be piled here and there; it was the same idea as when the cars were used: to prevent the police from rushing ahead. The point was not to stay there. The point was that there was a demonstration which was attacked by the police, and the point was to prevent people from being badly hurt, and to stay there just a while. The point was not that we’re here and we’re going to stay here. People were rushing back. They’d build another barricade, fight with the police for a while, and then move somewhere else. The point was to k…
