---
title: "Fighting the Domestic Enemy: You"
author: "Kevin Carson"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-fighting-the-domestic-enemy-you"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 3rd September 2021 from mutualist.blogspot.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-carson-fighting-the-domestic-enemy-you.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-fighting-the-domestic-enemy-you.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Gretchen Ross has an unsettling piece at UnCapitalist Journal on the abuse of the government’s new powers against “domestic terrorism” to go after animal rights activists and “eco-terrorists.” Unfortunately, this is nothing new. The government has been targeting the anti-globalization left and other domestic political enemies, under cover of ostensible “counter-terror” policies, for some time. The use of “counter-terror” policy to justify domestic police statism originally seized, in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing, on the pretext of right-wing extremism: the so-called “patriot” or “militia” movement. Clinton’s counter-terrorism act of 1996, arguably more dangerous than anything since done by Ashcroft (but give it time), gave the President blanket authority to declare any organization “terrorist” by executive fiat, and then to seize its assets without due process of law. The latter provision has been used by the government since 9–11, by the way: the Justice Department has used the threat of civil forfeiture to force ISPs to close down a number of sites, like (for example) IRARadio, which archived interviews with Sinn Fein leaders. The controversial shutting down of Islamic charities, and the threats of stripping citizenship by administrative fiat from contributors to such charities (which resurfaces periodically in leaked draft legislation), are all built on a legal foundation established by Bill Clinton. In December 1999, with the Seattle protests, the U.S. government turned on a dime and treated the anti-globalization movement as enemy number one. (Jim Redden, “Police State Targets the Left” The Zoh Show: Newsbytes (May 2, 2000)) It’s quite understandable. Even before the post-Seattle movement caused such panic, RAND analysts were expressing grave concern over the possibilities of decentralized “netwar” techniques for undermining elite control. David Ronfeldt saw ominous signs of such a broader movement in the global political support network for the Zapatistas. Loose, ad hoc coalitions of affinity groups, organizing through the Internet, could throw together large demonstrations at short notice, and “swarm” the government and mainstream media with phone calls, letters, and emails far beyond their capacity to absorb. Ronfeldt noted a parallel between such techniques and the “leaderless resistance” advocated by right-wing white supremacist Louis Beam, circulating in some Constitutionalist/militia circles (The Zapatists “Social Netwar” in Mexico, MR-994-A (1998)). These were, in fact, the very methods later used at Seattle and afterward. Decentralized “netwar,” the stuff of elite nightmares, was Huntington’s “crisis of governability” on steroids. Paul Rosenberg, in “The Empire Strikes Back,” recounts in horrifying detail the illegal repression and political dirty tricks used by local police forces against anti-globalization activists at protests in 1999 and 2000. There have even been some reports that Garden Plot (see below) was activated on a local basis at Seattle, and that Delta Force units provided intelligence and advice to local police. (Alexander Cockburn, “The Jackboot State: The War Came Home and We’re Losing It” Counterpunch May 10, 2000; “US Army Intel Units Spying on Activists” Intelligence Newsletter #381 April 5, 2000) Seizing on the opportunity presented by the 9–11 attacks, Ashcroft’s Justice Department was able to push through (via the USA PATRIOT Act) a whole laundry list of police state measures desired by the FBI that Congress had been unwilling to swallow five years earlier. A good many of the most objectionable features of USA PATRIOT were provisions in the original version of Clinton’s counter-terror bill that wound up on the cutting room floor in 1996. Although Al-Qaeda was ostensibly the target of these sweeping new powers, the powers granted under USA PATRIOT have actually been used far more for expanding existing “wars” on drugs and gangs than against Islamist terrorists. Worse, there are indi…
