---
title: "Bhagat Singh and the Ghadar Movement"
author: "Harish K. Puri"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/harish-k-puri-bhagat-singh-and-the-ghadar-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "[Revised version of the paper presented at the Seminar on “Bhagat Singh and His Legend”, organised by World Punjabi Centre at Punjabi University, Patiala on October 22–23, 2007] Retrieved on 4th March 2021 from anarchyindia.wordpress.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "harish-k-puri-bhagat-singh-and-the-ghadar-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/harish-k-puri-bhagat-singh-and-the-ghadar-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I        II It is well known that from his young age Bhagat Singh was deeply impressed by the Ghadar Movement and that he regarded Kartar Singh Sarabha as his hero. Bandi Jeewan by Sachindranath Sanyal, which included the first historical account of the movement by an insider, was “a basic textbook“ which he and his friends at the National School at Lahore read and discussed. The Rowlatt Committee Report of 1918, containing the British Government’s secret intelligence version of the Ghadar movement, was another. Bhagat Singh had personally met some of the leaders of the Ghadar Party such as Bhai Santokh Singh, the founder and editor of the Kirti monthly, Baba Sohan Singh Bhakna, whom he met in Lahore Central Jail, Lala Ram Saran Das and Bhai Randhir Singh. Bhagat Singh was overwhelmed by their individual heroism and the sacrifices made by them. Until the beginning of 1928, his fascination for the Ghadar spirit centred on these aspects, particularly the audacious challenge of the Ghadarites to the British rulers. The political goal of the Hindustan Republican Army founded by Sachindranath Sanyal was, like that of the Ghadarites, the founding of a federal republic of the United States of India. The revival of the Naujawan Bharat Sabha in April 1928 by the Kirti organisation in collaboration with him provided for closer association of Bhagat Singh with the former Ghadarites. The impact of the Russian Revolution and the contact with Kirti Ghadarites led him and his comrades towards a fresh thinking on their objectives and methods. A mature thinking is reflected in the three significant writings of Bhagat Singh during the last six months of his life in jail. An attempt is made here to situate Bhagat Singh in the Ghadar movement—the different stages and levels of rethinking among the Ghadarites on the one hand and Bhagat Singh and his comrades on the other. That may help us to understand how Bhagat Singh attempted to deal with the problems and contradictions he faced in the process. The Ghadar movement launched among the Indian immigrants on the Pacific coast of the USA looked to the 1857 Rebellion as its source of inspiration. A series of chapters from V. D. Savarkar’s The Indian War of Independence 1857 were included in the Ghadar weekly. Lala Har Dayal’s anarchist nationalist exhortations through the Ghadar started from November 1, 1913. These were more prominently displayed in his pamphlet Philosophy of the Bomb circulated by the Ghadar Party. In a lyrical celebration of the bomb thrown at Lord Harding in 1912, in another pamphlet named Yugantar Circular, he exhorted his admirers: Hail! Hail! Hail! the Bomb of 23 December, 1912… Harbinger of hope and courage, dear re-awakener of slumbering souls… concentrated moral dynamite… the esperanto of revolution. [1] Imaginations of a popular armed uprising in India with the support of the rebellious soldiers of the British Indian Army moved many of them emotionally. When the First World War erupted, it was considered the most opportune moment for thousands of Ghadarites to go to India to launch a war against British rule. Practically all of them were Punjabis; predominantly Sikhs from the then central Punjab districts. The rebellion was to start from there and the focus was on contacts in Sikh regiments stationed in Punjab. They had little knowledge of the political situation in Punjab and there was little preparation. But the passions were high. Many were ready to sacrifice their lives. They could not wait. The Ghadar paper invited the patriots with a typical call: WANTED : Fearless, Courageous Soldiers for launching Ghadar (Mutiny) in India SALARY : Death AWARD : Martyrdom and Freedom PLACE : The Battlefield of India Within two-to-three months hordes of them started arriving in India in ships. Many leaders were arrested or detained on arrival in India or ordered to be confined to their villages. Kartar Singh Sarabha was prominent in organising the scattered groups, building cont…
