---
title: "The Case For Liberty"
author: "Libertarian Socialist Rants"
date: "2016"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/libertarian-socialist-rants-the-case-for-liberty"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "My Political Beliefs, Part Two"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "libertarian-socialist-rants-the-case-for-liberty.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/libertarian-socialist-rants-the-case-for-liberty.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Democracy Under Libertarian Socialism        Education Under Libertarian Socialism        The Workplace Under Libertarian Socialism In part one, through conceptual analysis, I found out that capitalism is slavery, freedom requires equality of power to exist, the state is a logical contradiction in terms regardless of what economic system it operates under, and that most of the problems in our society stem from social hierarchy. I came to the conclusion that we should have a non-bureaucratic, non-hierarchical society based on free associations and workers’ control of the means of production, in other words, libertarian socialism. If you’d like to find out how I arrived at that in full detail, feel free to check out part one, which is linked in the description. In this video, I’m going to be talking about what a libertarian socialist society might look like, but before I begin, I’d like to clarify that this is in no way some sort of inflexible blueprint. We should be open to experimentation, and we should always seek to change our minds when new information is made available. That being said, let’s begin by looking at what the democratic system in a libertarian socialist society might look like. Thomas Jefferson said that a democracy is nothing more than mob rule, where 51% of the people may take away the rights of the other 49%. However, even this is preferable to our current state of affairs, in which the political and economic elite may take away the rights of the vast majority of the population. Under libertarian socialism, the goal is to minimise or eliminate hierarchical relationships of control and subjugation, and that should include not only the subjugation of the general public by capitalists and the government, but also the subjugation within the general public of the minority by the majority. It thus follows that in a libertarian socialist society, the goal of the democratic system should be for the public to directly look for the largest consensus possible. Suppose a group of people vote on whether or not they support proposal A, and 51% are for it and 49% are against it. Instead of the 49% being forced to comply with A, the 49% would be free to explain why they object to it. If they disagree but are willing to let it slide, they can stand aside and let it pass. They can also modify the proposal, and see if that creates a larger consensus. If they’re totally unhappy with it, they can block the proposal, and instead suggest something different altogether. The process would continue until the largest possible consensus is reached. There are numerous reasons why this model of consensus decision-making is preferable to representative democracy. Here’s a list of them. It’s a more accurate representation of the public will. This is because in direct democracy, you represent your own views yourself, because the person who is the most capable of doing that is, of course, you. It fosters critical thinking. Because the goal is to create as large a consensus as possible, there is always room for improvement. It runs on dissent. With every single proposal made, people will ask how they can modify it in a way that makes more people happy. It fosters solidarity. Through a constant process of looking for more and more common ground, it unifies people and strengthens connections between them. When practiced on a large scale, this would reduce the likelihood of anti-social behaviour by some margin. It is the default way for human beings to interact with one another. If you go out with a group of friends, the chances are you will make decisions as a group in exactly this manner, discussing and evaluating the possibilities until you arrive at something everybody’s happy with. In this sense, people participate in anarchist activities without even realising it. This isn’t some radical concept – we do this as human beings all the time. Consensus decision-making is something that we are naturally accustomed to do, because it makes …
