---
title: "Anarca-Islam"
author: "Mohamed Jean Veneuse"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mohamed-jean-veneuse-anarca-islam"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A thesis submitted to the Department of Sociology. Queen’s University Kingston, Ontario, Canada (August, 2009)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mohamed-jean-veneuse-anarca-islam.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mohamed-jean-veneuse-anarca-islam.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract      Chapter 1. Panegyric Desert of the Present        On Islam, Anarchism and the Newest Social Movements        2. With an Alibi: Who is Speaking?        3. Everything Divided — The Argument Condensed      Chapter 2. Who Says What With Respect to Islamic anarchism... Can Anyone Speak to What it Is ?        1. Chapter Introduction        2. A Review of the Academic Literature        3. Review of the Movement Literature        4. Conclusions Drawn from Reviewing both Literatures      Chapter 3. Methodology and Theories        1. Chapter Introduction        2. Thus Spoke God: The Method of Anarchic-Ijtihad        3. Thus Speaks Academia: The Theoretical Framework      Chapter 4. Anarca-Islam’s Space and Political Consciousness in Relation to anarchism, Islam and the capitalist-State        1. Chapter Introduction        2. Islam is Dead. Anarchism is Dead.        3. Daddy-Mommy-Me = Deleuze & Guattari’s Oedipal Triad      Chapter 5. The Birth of the Clinic — Seeing and Knowing the Clinic’s Commitments in Resistance to Daddy-Mommy-Me        1. Chapter Introduction        2. Castrating Daddy: Anarca-Islam’s Anti-Authoritarian Concepts & Practices        3. Shit-Talkin’ Mommy: Anarca-Islam’s Anti-Capitalist Concepts & Practices        4. The Patient comes to their own Aid      Chapter 6. The Beginning is the End is the Beginning        1. A Summary of the Thesis        2. Connecting M.A. to Ph.D.: Where Anarca-Islam proceeds to from here      Bibliography (or References) As an anarchist and a Muslim, I have witnessed troubled times as a result of extreme divisions that exist between these two identities and communities. To minimize these divisions, I argue for an anti-capitalist and anti-authoritarian Islam, an ‘anarca-Islam’, that disrupts two commonly held beliefs: one, that Islam is necessarily authoritarian and capitalist; two, that anarchism is necessarily anti-religious. From this position I offer ‘anarca-Islam’ which I believe can help open-minded (non-essentialist/non-dogmatic) Muslims and anarchists to better understand each other, and therefore to more effectively collaborate in the context of what Richard JF Day has called the ’newest’ social movements. In Open Sky (1990), Paul Virilio argues that “the ban on representation in certain cultural practices and the refusal to see — women, for example, in the case of Islam — is being superseded at this very moment by the [Western] cultural obligation to see, with the overexposure of the visible image taking over from the underexposure of the age of the written word” (90). That is, Islam and Muslims [1] are now not only facing the perils of invisibility, but also “the impossibility of not being seen” (1997: 90, emphasis added). This Western obligation to “gingerly sneak a sidelong look” (Virilio, 1990: 90) at Islam and Muslims, I contend, is generally based on two intents: First, an intent to unmask an inexhaustible supply of hidden terrorists. And, second, to set up Islam as an oppressive regime, as is the case with the clichéd view of veiled Muslim women undergoing the horrors of Non-Western patriarchy, or of Iraqis and Afghanis as feeble subjects of Islamic tyranny who must be freed. Muslims in the West face an intensified assault on representation; in other words, representations are abundant and often function through binary significations. As Jean Baudrillard argues there is a “reduction of Islam [and Muslims] to” the representations Fundamentalism and Orientalism, or terrorism and oppression, “not to destroy but to domesticate [them]...and the symbolic challenges” they represent “for the entire West” (Baudrillard, 1995: 28). In the West, it has practically become a pathological obligation, born “of scorn”, to clear the semiotic space of any alternative representations, as if the Fundamentalist/Orientalist pairing were school uniforms (Foucault in Afray and Anderson, 2005: 210). The West’s symbolic challenge is forcing Muslims to submit to these represen…
