---
title: "Fuck The King"
author: "Anarchist Federation"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-federation-fuck-the-king"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 4th May 2023 from organisemagazine.org.uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarchist-federation-fuck-the-king.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-federation-fuck-the-king.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Conquest of Inbreds        The Little Prince        The House of the Dragon        What if we didn’t have a King? “And now they get one sniff of an ermine robe and they go all gooey,” -Vimes When Queen Elizabeth II died, a mass hysteria engulfed Britain. News channels were packed with nothing but fawning praise for her 70-year reign. The country ground to a standstill at such a rapid rate that it put the preceding months-long strike wave to shame. Countless mourners lined up around central London, just to catch a glimpse of her coffin. It was strange for so many of us to be mourning someone that none of us had ever met, but who simultaneously was so omnipresent in our lives. Such an outpouring of societal grief, usually expected of authoritarian states with lifelong dictators, unveiled for the first time in decades the totalitarian cult that lies at the heart of the United Kingdom. It was as though God themselves had died, because to millions of people, they had. Before Elizabeth’s body had gone cold, the position was immediately handed to her oldest son, as is the tradition. “The Queen is Dead! Long Live the King!” We had been ruled by the same single person for five generations and now, without so much as a moment to adjust to the change, we were ruled by someone else. People that objected to the regime change, or asked for a democratic say over the transition, were attacked, arrested and prosecuted for speaking out. The first act of the monarchy’s latest iteration was a crackdown on freedom of speech. Soon an old English wizard will present him with a special hat, while he’s sat on a special slab of Scottish sandstone, and his sovereignty over the lives of all Britons will be confirmed. There will be a huge parade through London, guarded by an army of police to ensure it’s not ruined by any dissenters that might interfere and to block any signs of the country’s systemic poverty from spoiling the view from our new King’s golden carriage. No expense will be spared to ensure the country’s richest and most powerful man finally gets his big special day. While His Majesty’s Government could barely scrape together any money to provide starving children with food, they managed to find enough down the nation’s sofa to provide an estimated £100 million just for the coronation. Bread is literally being stolen from our mouths to pay for an exercise in societally-enforced narcissism. How did we get to this point? How did we end up at such a dire stage in our existence, that millions of people are starving in the streets while the richest and most powerful few gorge themselves in palaces? And what can we do to stop it? Until the 9 th century, monarchy was quite the foreign idea to the people of these islands. We had experienced the rule of far-away emperors and followed the odd chieftain into battle, but none before had called themselves “King”. That was until the squabbling polities of what we now know as England and Scotland each fell, piece-by-piece, to the rule of one. In 1066, the problem of rule by one led to catastrophe, as people from distant lands claimed the right to rule England. It was the Normans that won the day and cemented their rule over the country with fire and blood – literally burning down and massacring whole villages until their rule was accepted. Native English rebels, with support from the Scots, Welsh and Irish, attempted to overthrow these new rulers, but to no avail. England was remade into what it is today by conquest, but the conqueror’s blood lust was not sated. As they progressively lost their holdings in their native France, the Norman turned their attention towards the north and west. Almost immediately, the Normans and their English collaborators in parliament set their sights on subjugating Wales. The English Kings appointed their successors as the “Prince of Wales”, in a sick imperial tradition that continues to this day. Attempts by the Welsh to choose their own leaders and rebel against i…
