---
title: "Anarchism: its philosophy and ideal"
author: "Pëtr Kropotkin"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-anarchism-its-philosophy-and-ideal"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated from the German by Harry Lyman Koopman. First published in San Francisco by Free Society, 1898 Retrieved on February 25th, 2009 from dwardmac.pitzer.edu."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "petr-kropotkin-anarchism-its-philosophy-and-ideal.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-anarchism-its-philosophy-and-ideal.epub"
    hosted: false
---

It is not without a certain hesitation that I have decided to take the philosophy and ideal of Anarchy as the subject of this lecture. Those who are persuaded that Anarchy is a collection of visions relating to the future, and an unconscious striving toward the destruction of all present civilization, are still very numerous; and to clear the ground of such prejudices of our education as maintain this view we should have, perhaps, to enter into many details which it would be difficult to embody in a single lecture. Did not the Parisian press, only two or three years ago, maintain that the whole philosophy of Anarchy consisted in destruction, and that its only argument was violence? Nevertheless Anarchists have been spoken of so much lately, that part of the public has at last taken to reading and discussing our doctrines. Sometimes men have even given themselves trouble to reflect, and at the present moment we have at least gained a point: it is willingly admitted that Anarchists have an ideal. Their ideal is even found too beautiful, too lofty for a society not composed of superior beings. But is it not pretentious on my part to speak of a philosophy, when, according to our critics, our ideas are but dim visions of a distant future? Can Anarchy pretend to possess a philosophy, when it is denied that Socialism has one? This is what I am about to answer with all possible precision and clearness, only asking you to excuse me beforehand if I repeat an example or two which I have already given at a London lecture, and which seem to be best fitted to explain what is meant by the philosophy of Anarchism. * * * You will not bear me any ill will if I begin by taking a few elementary illustrations borrowed from natural sciences. Not for the purpose of deducing our social ideas from them — far from it; but simply the better to set off certain relations, which are easier grasped in phenomena verified by the exact sciences than in examples only taken from the complex facts of human societies. Well, then, what especially strikes us at present in exact sciences, is the profound modification which they are undergoing now, in the whole of their conceptions and interpretations of the facts of the universe. There was a time, you know, when man imagined the earth placed in the center of the universe. Sun, moon, planets and stars seemed to roll round our globe; and this globe, inhabited by man, represented for him the center of creation. He himself — the superior being on his planet — was the elected of his Creator. The sun, the moon, the stars were but made for him; toward him was directed all the attention of a God, who watched the least of his actions, arrested the sun’s course for him, wafted in the clouds, launching his showers or his thunderbolts on fields and cities, to recompense the virtue or punish the crimes of mankind. For thousands of years man thus conceived the universe. You know also what an immense change was produced in the sixteenth century in all conceptions of the civilized part of mankind, when it was demonstrated that, far from being the center of the universe, the earth was only a grain of sand in the solar system-a ball, much smaller even than the other planets; that the sun itself — though immense in comparison to our little earth, was but a star among many other countless stars which we see shining in the skies and swarming in the Milky Way. How small man appeared in comparison to this immensity without limits, how ridiculous his pretensions! All the philosophy of that epoch, all social and religious conceptions, felt the effects of this transformation in cosmogony. Natural science, whose present development we are so proud of, only dates from that time. But a change, much more profound, and with far wider reaching results, is being effected at the present time in the whole of the sciences, and Anarchy, you will see, is but one of the many manifestations of this evolution. Take any work on astronomy of the last century,…
