---
title: "Fight Social Distancing — for a solidarity-based and militant approach to the virus"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fight-social-distancing-for-a-solidarity-based-and-militant-approach-to-the-virus"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "On the challenges faced by radical, anti-authoritarian, anarchist, feminist and other circles in dealing with the current “pandemic”"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "fight-social-distancing-for-a-solidarity-based-and-militant-approach-to-the-virus.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fight-social-distancing-for-a-solidarity-based-and-militant-approach-to-the-virus.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Social Distancing        We need to talk about death        Against the authoritarian shift        Emergency laws In this text we would like to start the attempt to find a solidarity-based but also militant approach to the spread of the CoronaVirus. It is not about an assessment of the danger or the respective characteristics of this virus. There have been and will always be new virus infections. Consequently, the current situation is not completely new. Diseases and pathogens are part of our lives, like death and society itself. We must therefore find a way of dealing with them beyond the existing crisis and panic reactions. In Europe we have just gone through at least a century of social distancing, individualisation and atomisation. This isolation serves the capitalist forms of economy, e.g. to organise reproductive work or to prevent resistant and collective action against existing structures of domination. In addition, past pandemics and the idea that has taken root in all our minds and collective memory have also contributed to this: The “other” people can be dangerous. Getting too close to them means being infected under certain circumstances. To get the (invisible) disease. This widespread mistrust particularly affects people whom we understand as “foreign”. This mistrust hinders both the organisation of life in collective and affective communities to overcome injustice and the struggle against domination. It makes it more difficult for us to come into contact with people and create lasting human relationships. Whether it is to share a part of life or to fight together against oppression and exploitation. Not only for the purpose of organization and future struggles, but for all of our lives as social beings, it is absolutely essential that we refuse the demands of social distancing (no physical and social contacts) and find ways to do just the opposite, while respecting personal feelings and limits. According to the scientific findings to date, there are “risk groups” that have more to fear than others when infected with the virus. This applies especially to old people and those with certain pre-existing diseases. Let us approach these people and others, be they employees, neighbours or friends. Let’s see how we can support them and consider how they can also participate in social life and in our struggles. But who will show solidarity with the people whom society and the state define as superfluous and unimportant? Taking care of each other means to fight against patriarchal, racist, fascist structures, as well as to build mutually supportive, self-managed “care” structures. Of course, young people should be aware of their privilege compared to older people, nothing can be said against it. But privileges are a complex matter. In the privileged, pacified Switzerland, sitting on all the wealth of the world, staying at home implies, for example, the privilege of having a home. Something that the migrants at the Turkish-Greek border do not have, who are rejected and killed by the military and fascist gangs with push-backs. A home is something that neither the migrants in the prisons and internment camps nor the homeless people in the European countries have. And neither the prisoners in the jails, who rightly revolt, but who are condemned by digital public opinion, by people who from their comfortable sofas don’t give a shit about these weak, excluded and exploited people. Let’s create gangs. Let us respond to the demand for social distance with social closeness, solidarity and resistance! Depending on the source, the virus has a mortality rate (probability of dying from infection) of between 0.5% and 3.4%. This is higher than the annual flu epidemic. The mortality rate increases with age and previous illness. Currently, the count goes so far that, for example in Italy, corona tests are still carried out after death. If there is a disease, the person is counted as “corona dead”, although it is unclear whether the …
