---
title: "Anarchy and Its Overlooked Role in Health and Healthcare"
author: "Ryan Essex"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ryan-essex-anarchy-and-its-overlooked-role-in-health-and-healthcare"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics Volume 32, Issue 3 (July 2023), pp. 397-405, DOI:10.1017/S096318012200072X"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ryan-essex-anarchy-and-its-overlooked-role-in-health-and-healthcare.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ryan-essex-anarchy-and-its-overlooked-role-in-health-and-healthcare.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        What Is Anarchy?        Anarchism in Health and Healthcare        Anarchy and Its Role in Fighting Oppression and Advancing Health        The Future of Anarchist Thought and Praxis in Health and Healthcare In this paper, I will argue that a number of well-known health interventions or initiatives could be considered anarchist, or at the very least are consistent with anarchist thinking and principles. In doing this I have two aims: First, anarchism is a misunderstood term—by way of example, I hope to first sketch out what anarchist solutions in health and healthcare could look like; second, I hope to show how anarchist thought could stand as a means to improve the health of many, remedying health inequalities acting as a buffer for the many harms that threaten health and well-being. On this second point, I will argue that there are a number of theoretical and instrumental reasons why greater engagement with anarchism and anarchist thinking is needed, along with how this could contribute to health and in addressing broader injustices that create and perpetuate poor health. On August 21, 1893, Emma Goldman spoke to a crowd of approximately 3,000 people in Union Square, New York, where she encouraged unemployed workers to take action in response to an economic crisis that became known as the Panic of 1893. Goldman was later convicted of inciting a riot and was sentenced to 1 year in Blackwell’s Island Penitentiary. At the time Blackwell’s Island (now Roosevelt Island) housed over 8,000 prisoners, medical care was limited and there were few nurses. Goldman was recruited by one of the prison doctors who treated her for an illness. She was put in charge of a 16-bed ward after only informal nursing training. She observed that her patients were like “victims, links in an endless chain of injustice and inequality.” [1] Almost all were poor, had little opportunity for employment, and were often imprisoned for sex work. Goldman was released from prison after a year and her experiences in prison set her on a course as a nurse and activist. When she was released Goldman began to work as a nurse and shortly after sought formal training abroad. When she returned to the United States in 1896, she worked primarily as a midwife and was struck by the high rates of maternal mortality amongst the working class and the unsafe conditions in which many gave birth. From this work Goldman was convinced that birth control was essential to women’s sexual and economic freedom, supporting Margaret Sanger’s campaign to make birth control widely available. Goldman published literature about contraception in an effort to empower women to make informed choices about their reproductive health. [2] In the early 1900s, Goldman was arrested at least twice for distributing information about contraception and for giving lessons on its use. In 1916, she turned one of her trials into a forum on birth control, attracting national attention and garnering support from academics, activists, and artists, among others. [3] As well as a nurse, Goldman was an anarchist and is today considered one of the most important figures in the history of anarchism. Throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s, she spoke frequently about anarchism and its potential for liberation, in her own words: Anarchism, then, really stands for the liberation of the human mind from the dominion of religion; the liberation of the human body from the dominion of property; liberation from the shackles and restraint of government. Anarchism stands for a social order based on the free grouping of individuals for the purpose of producing real social wealth; an order that will guarantee to every human being free access to the earth and full enjoyment of the necessities of life, according to individual desires, tastes, and inclinations. [4] Anarchism refers to a diverse tradition of political theory and action, which is drawn together by its opposition to hierarchy, government, and other…
