---
title: "Bourgeois influences on anarchism"
author: "Luigi Fabbri"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luigi-fabbri-bourgeois-influences-on-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Text by Italian anarchist communist Luigi Fabbri written around the time of the First World War, addressing problems arising from the stereotyping of anarchism in popular culture and the negative effect this had on actual anarchist movement. The original in Italian is available in: https://www.liber"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "luigi-fabbri-bourgeois-influences-on-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luigi-fabbri-bourgeois-influences-on-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Violent Literature and Anarchism      Bourgeois Influences on Anarchism      Anarchists and the Use of Violence      Violent Language in Polemics and Propaganda In order to avoid misunderstandings, we first need to clarify our terms. There is no theory of “violent anarchism.” Anarchism is a combination of social doctrines which have as a common basis the elimination of coercive, human-over-human authority; and the majority of its partisans repudiate all forms of violence and consider it legitimate only as a form of self-defense. But, as there is no precise line separating defense and offense, and as the concept of defense can be understood in very diverse ways, there appear from time to time violent acts, committed by anarchists as a form of individual rebellion, directed against the lives of heads of state and the representatives of the ruling class. We’ll classify these manifestations of individual violence as “violent anarchism,” and this solely for the sake of convenience, not because the name reflects the reality. In fact, all political movements, with no exceptions, have had periods in which violent acts of rebellion were committed in their names-generally when these movements found themselves at a point of extreme opposition to the dominant political or social institutions. At present, the movement which finds itself, or appears to find itself, in the forefront and in absolute opposition to the dominant institutions is anarchism; it’s logical then that manifestations of violence against these dominant institutions assume the name and certain ‘special characteristics of anarchism. Having said this, I want to make brief note of something which appears to have gone unnoticed: the influence of literature upon manifestations of violent rebellion, and the influence it receives from such acts. Naturally, I’ll leave to one side classic literature, though you’ll certainly find justification for political crimes in Cicero, the bible, Shakespeare, Alfieri, and in all the historical works passed from hand to hand in youth. In the stories of Judith in the bible, and Brutus in ancient history, even with Orsini and Agesilao Milano in modem history, one finds a whole series of political crimes for which historians and poets have made at times unjustified apologies. But I don’t want to speak of these crimes, because to do so would carry me too far afield, because it would not be difficult to see in them the play of diverse circumstances which give them diverse characteristics. I only wish to refer to that literature which has a direct and open relation to the type of political act presently characterized as “anarchist.” Since 1880, acts of “violent anarchism” have continually occurred, with the largest number coming in the period 1891–1894, especially in France, Spain, and Italy, I don’t know if anyone has noticed, but in precisely this period there flourished, especially in France, sensationalist literature which didn’t shrink from glorifying to seventh heaven every violent “anarchist” act, including even the least understandable ,and justifiable; and its language was truly an instigation to propaganda by the deed. The writers who dedicated themselves to this type of violent literary sport were almost all completely outside of the anarchist movement; writers were extremely rare in whom literary and artistic advocacy coincided with a true and natural theoretical persuasion, to a conscious acceptance of anarchist doctrines. Almost all of them worked in their private and public lives in complete contradiction to the terrible things and ideas they advocated in articles, in novels, in stories, or in poems. It happens with great frequency that one finds very violent “anarchist” declarations in the works of writers who are widely known to belong to parties diametrically opposed to anarchism. Even among those who for a moment appeared to have seriously embraced anarchist ideas, only one or two later maintained that intellectual direction.…
