---
title: "Anarchist / Black Bloc Motivation"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-anarchist-black-bloc-motivation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on September 1, 2009 from www.geocities.com/kk_abacus/ioaa/bbmotiv.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-anarchist-black-bloc-motivation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-anarchist-black-bloc-motivation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Genoa        Justifying the Blocs’ Tactics        Confrontation        But Violence is a Problem        Stop the Violence by Being Effective        What Would Gandhi Have Done?        “Non-violence Teaches Us...”        An Appeal This anonymous article was found on the web. Many seem to be confused or angry at those who have used street fighting tactics in Genoa. By explaining the motivation behind using these street fighting tactics, especially from the Black Bloc perspective, this article hopes to sooth some of that anger. The article also suggests some ways we as a movement can move forward concerning the disagreement over forceful or non-violent direct action. Firstly, I am an anarchist, and this has been written because much of the anarchist position on street fighting tactics needs to be explained, especially after the murder of the brave street fighter Carlo Giuliani. Nobody should expect radical change to be a comfortable and easy process. Many people are angry, and confused by events in Genoa, this article is designed to help turn some of that anger and confusion into constructive ends. Because the anarchist movement is an anti-authoritarian one of free thinkers I, of course, only talk for myself, but I believe many feel the same thing. This isn’t just a dogmatic defense of the Bloc in Genoa. The Black Bloc made mistakes I’m sure, and there are issues on how the Bloc can weed out problems, however I still believe in the Black Bloc and it’s tactics for many good reasons, which are: I don’t believe we should have a seat at the table with people like the G8, WTO, IMF etc, as you can’t reform capitalism in anyway more than just blunting some of the sharpest corners. As such that is why I don’t support the lobby groups like Greenpeace who would seem to want to ride some of the wave of support the anti-globalization movement has been getting, and turn it into a place at the powerfuls table. Further more anarchists don’t think elite groups of lobbyists are any substitute for fighting towards the real and long reaching benefits that direct democracy would offer. I don’t believe that you can use some sort of mass peer pressure on the system to be nice, as many pacifist protestors seem to think. This is because, as I said, you can’t reform capitalism much, as it will fundamentally always exploit people. The only permanent change is getting rid of capitalism, not asking it to reform itself. This is on top of the issue raised by Tony Blair, who said: “We recognize and praise the role that peaceful protest and argument have played, for example in putting issues like debt relief on the international agenda.” A statement which could be taken in the way he wants you to take it, or as it could mean that he likes peaceful protests because of the little to no change it bring towards the fundamentals of the system yet helps to (when used exclusively) disarms dissent by giving the system the illusion of being democratic (something we know it isn’t). I, and many others, believe the latter meaning and therefore aren’t content with solely street partying capitalism and oppression out of existence. I believe that showing people fighting back against security forces isn’t in all cases disempowering or turns people uninvolved off. Quite the opposite to the mild to non-confrontational approach of many other activists I believe that the only way to stay credible is to be as confrontational as appropriate to our opponent (in this case the G8 ministers). Effective, not symbolic, confrontation is what really shows we are serious, and attracts more people to the movement (as opposed to counter summits, manifestos, marches etc, however these thing also have a very important role to play). I think this movement has got as far as it has because of its diversity. The above groups that I have written above in the other points, while I disagree with them on some issues, I still welcome them to the movement, want to co-operate and agree not to interf…
