---
title: "The AWL Versus Anarchism (part 2)"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-the-awl-versus-anarchism-part-2"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 24th April 2021 from anarchism.pageabode.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarcho-the-awl-versus-anarchism-part-2.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-the-awl-versus-anarchism-part-2.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1: “Bakunin, Kropotkin, and Malatesta were not so naive as to believe that anarchism could be established overnight…”        2. Anarchists and working-class struggle        3. Anarchism and anarcho-syndicalism        4. Anarchism and the medieval commune        5. Anarchism and capitalism        6. Equating Trotskyism with Stalinism (and with social democracy?)        Conclusions Last year, I participated in a debate with a Leninist sect, the AWL. I produced a leaflet for the debate, placed a written-up version of my talk notes on line and blogged about it (Leninists are strange). Somewhat later, I was informed by the AWL that they were putting my leaflet in a pamphlet. Only now have I actually bothered to read it (I was a bit busy with union work). Suffice to say, I’m not impressed. It is the same mishmash of inaccurate assertion, invention and what seems wilful ignorance of the reality of Bolshevik power. Little did I know that Martin Thomas had written a “response” to my leaflet entitled Six points in reply to Iain McKay (submitted on Christmas Day, 2011). Here I respond to the response. Suffice to say, Thomas’ comments express what can be termed (to use the words John Kenneth Galbraith popularised) “conventional wisdom” – in this case, of Leninists about anarchism. So Thomas is simply expressing what he thinks anarchism is – sadly, no amount of evidence seems to have an impact as I will show. This is to be expected, for it is very difficult for Leninists to make an objective criticism of Anarchism. It exposes how ignorant they are of anarchism as well as the authoritarian nature of their ideology. Yes, I will be repeating many of the same points I made in my talk to the AWL as well as in An Anarchist FAQ and in numerous other replies to Marxists (usually the SWP, but not always). So please accept my apologies if you have read these facts and arguments before. I present this reply to help breakdown the “conventional wisdom” of Leninists in the hope that we can actually get a serious debate over the issues that matter started. Sadly, I doubt Leninists stop repeating nonsense about anarchism anytime soon – if they did then they would need to seriously look at their own tradition and its (negative) impact on socialism. This response will, by necessity, be longer (much longer) than Thomas’ response. The reason is simple – Thomas makes so many inaccurate and unsupported assertions about anarchism (and Marxism!) that I need to provide substantial evidence to refute them. It takes little space to assert, for example, that Proudhon did not think industrial capital was exploitative but it takes substantially more to discuss his theory of collective force, why this lead him to oppose wage-labour and support co-operatives in order to end the exploitation (“theft”) inherit in selling your labour to a boss. Similarly with claims on Bakunin’s syndicalism, Bolshevik ideology and what actually happened during the Russian Revolution. Suffice to say, this covers much of what is discussed in section H of An Anarchist FAQ . If Leninists bothered to acquaint themselves and engage with anarchist theory and history, they would not produce so many howlers and so we anarchists would spend less time, energy and space stating the obvious. In my initial leaflet I asked this question: “Is it not time for Marxists to stop producing strawman arguments against anarchism?” The answer to this question will become sadly all too obvious as you read Thomas’ response… Thomas’ first point is based on a quote from Murray Bookchin: “ Bakunin, Kropotkin, and Malatesta were not so naive as to believe that anarchism could be established overnight…” He comments: “Certainly sometimes they wrote that the road to an anarchist society would be long. But always, as far I know, they insisted that anarchists should dispute, resist, and disrupt moves by workers to create a strong, centralised, democratic authority of their own – a workers’ state or semi-state – during …
