---
title: "Anti-abortionists told to SPUC OFF!"
author: "Aileen O’Carroll"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/aileen-o-carroll-anti-abortionists-told-to-spuc-off"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Workers Solidarity No. 38 — Spring 1993. Retrieved on 10th October 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "aileen-o-carroll-anti-abortionists-told-to-spuc-off.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/aileen-o-carroll-anti-abortionists-told-to-spuc-off.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       why a referendum? .....the background        Fianna Fail... the peoples’ party        The rest of Dáil        Dublin Abortion Information Campaign        HERE COMES REAC        The “pro-life” Movement        Other Forces        The results Ireland is a conservative country. Since the founding of the southern state 70 years ago, church has been intertwined with state. The majority of its citizens belong to the Catholic Church. Catholic ethos is enshrined in the constitution, in the laws, in the education system. Catholic tentacles make there way into most areas of public policy. Yet Ireland is changing. Where previously the church was an almost unquestioned authority on moral issues in Ireland, now the positions many Irish people hold on social issues are in direct conflict with the church. The most recent example of this were the abortion referenda held on November 26 th , 1992. The sea change that has occurred in Ireland on the highly emotive issue of abortion reflects a change in the fabric of Irish society. As anarchists we are committed to a basic change in the present system. This will only occur when the working class no longer accept the legitimacy of capitalism. It is frequently argued, usually by those with a blinkered knowledge of history that, it is impossible for society to change in such a fundamental way. Yet societies do evolve. People do break from the dogmas of the past. Humanity isn’t caught in a stuck groove. One of the questions socialists must be able to answer is how do ideas change. It is by looking at the examples that history throws up that we can find the answer. So what did happen in Ireland in 1992? Who were the key players? Who was influential and who wasn’t and lastly what are the implications of the abortion result. In February 1992, the Attorney General, in accordance with the Constitution, placed an injunction on a 14 year old alleged rape victim. The purpose of the injunction was to prevent her from travelling to Britain in order to obtain an abortion. Irish people were appalled. Protests sprang up immediately. For two weeks there were near continuous demonstrations at the Dáil. Internationally the case received huge coverage, with foreign news crews flooding into the country. Fianna Fáil, the party in power, had just gone through a leadership change and the last thing they wanted was to be saddled with another abortion controversy. The Attorney General’s ruling was upheld in the High Court. At a march organised by the Dublin Abortion Information Campaign (DAIC), 10,000 people chanted ‘for a womens’ right to choose’. Faced with this mounting anger the government took the unprecedented steps of offering to pay any court costs, enabling Ms X to travel to England. In doing so it interpreted the Constitution a new way and changed Irish law in regard to abortion. Where previously abortion was completely illegal now it seemed that abortions could be performed here if there was a threat to the life of the mother, including the threat of suicide. However in any other case, it would still be possible to obtain injunctions in order to prevent a women travelling. The “pro-life” movement was up in arms about abortion on hallowed Irish soil. The government did not want to face the embarrassment of further injunctions. It was faced with two possible solutions to the thorny problem it faced. Either to resolve it though legislation, which would entail introducing abortion in some form into Ireland. Or to hold a referendum, thus avoiding the necessity of stating their own position on the issue. As politicians they did not want to alienate the “pro-life” movement, which is influential in rural areas. Neither did the party want to isolate the mass of new liberal working class voters that they are currently wooing as their traditional rural base dwindles. Their attempt to sit on the fence resulted in a referendum wording which neither side liked very much. The electorate were asked to vote in three separat…
