---
title: "Parliament or Democracy?"
author: "Kevin Doyle"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-parliament-or-democracy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 3rd June 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-doyle-parliament-or-democracy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-parliament-or-democracy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-parliament-or-democracy)

From the 1850s onwards, against a background of great new wealth in society and a working class that was more independent and resourceful, the ‘problem of democracy’ became urgent for the rich and powerful. In general wealth was rising throughout society, but so was the greed of those who owned the new factories, mines and plantations. The key question was: what was to be done about the general demand for democracy, and about the incessant clamour for political rights which, during the revolutions of 1848, had almost got completely out of hand?

Maintaining their privilege and wealth while generally conceding a semblance of democracy was the principal aim of the ‘rich and privileged’ during the second half of the 19 th century. Parliament is a means of diffusing democracy, of channelling real struggles into a safe dead-end. Time and time again it has become a graveyard for the workers’ movement.

The French Revolution of 1789 put an end to the idea that some people were born to rule. In only a short number of years one of the oldest and most powerful monarchies in Europe was swept away. In its place came the idea of legal equality and individual rights as set out in the ‘Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen.’

The basis of these new rights, established on foot of a great social upheaval, was the real hallmark of the French Revolution since it was accepted, from that point on, that laws and how they were made were the expression of the ‘general will’. As such these laws could be made and unmade as that ‘general will’ was discerned. This was the real break with the past.

At the time of the French Revolution the idea of the ‘general will’ was still new in politics. Even so the implications for the future were not difficult to make out. Sixty years earlier, in England, during the Civil War the very same issues had come to the fore. If the monarchy was to be dispensed with, what type of society should replace it? What exactly constituted the ‘general will’? And, as importantly, in whose service was its rule to be applied?

During the Putney Debates, the anti-Royalist forces who had fought to depose Charles II argued over these very issues. The principal leaders of the anti-Royalist movement, men such as Oliver Cromwell and others, were definite that the King’s arbitrary rule should end. But, equally, they were clear that the running of society could not be left to just anyone. The King’s right of power had rested on his birthright. Now that this was gone, a new form of distinction was needed, they argued, lest the rule of society fall into the hands of the common people. That new distinction was to be property. As Cromwell’s general, Henry Ireton, put it:

‘I think that no person hath a right to an interest or share in disposing of the affairs of the Kingdom... that have not a permanent fixed interest in the Kingdom.’ [1]

But this view was not shared by others who had also fought the King. The Civil War had thrown up many groupings. Some, such as the Levellers, were conscious of the social conditions of the day. Others still, the Diggers, had seized un-worked land and declared it their own by virtue of the plants they had put on it and the labour they had expended. Such groupings were profoundly stirred by the struggle against the autocrat Charles II. They were anti-authoritarian and viewed matters differently from the likes of Cromwell. The well-known Leveller, Thomas Rainsborough, countered Ireton with:

‘I think that the poorest ... in England hath a life to live as the greatest...and therefore ... every man that is to live under a government ought first by his own consent to put himself under that government.’ [2]

But this idea that everyone, irrespective of individual wealth, was entitled to a say in the running of society had dangerous implications. Implications that directly threatened the interests of the ‘men of property’ and the rich. Ireton again:

‘By the same right of natureÉ by which you say a man hath an equal with another of the choosing of him that govern him, by the same right of nature he hath the same right in any goods he sees.’ [3]

The central matter being ‘goods’. English society in the era of the Civil War was a much poorer society than it is today but, relative to the population of the time, there was still an abundance of wealth. That wealth was not shared equally. There was a massive disparity in who owned what, a major source of grievance as the Digger, Winstanley, noted:

‘And this is the bondage that the poor complain of, that they are kept poor by their brethren in a land where there is so much plenty for everyone.’ [4]

So, in the English Civil War, the abolition of the rule of the King had raised almost immediately a more intractable problem. If full equality was conceded wouldn’t the privilege of the rich be brought to an end? After all, it was Aristotle, thousands of years earlier, who had pointed out the most glaring fact: ‘The rich are few and the poor are many.’ In any straight forward count (or referendum) the interests of the rich would be swamped alongside the priorities of the more numerous poor. So was born the ‘problem of democracy’.

The immediate solution employed by the rich during the English Civil War was, of course, force of arms. This was the fate suffered by democrats such as the Diggers and the Levellers, both of which were dispersed using military means. It was ‘propertied’ men such as Cromwell and Ireton who benefited most. They ruled through a new Parliament, and had greatly increased power, while the poor suffered on. As an observer noted5 in his journey across England in 1660:

‘The island ... is ... governed by the influence of the sort of people that live plentifully and at ease upon their rents extracted from the toil of their tenants and servants ... each of whom within the bounds of his own estate acts the prince; he is purely absolute, his servants and labourers are in the nature of his vassals; his tenants indeed are free, but in the nature of subjects.’ [5]

Like the English Civil War, the French Revolution would have a limited effect on how society was organised in the short term. Though the French monarchy was fatally weakened and the ‘rule of law’ was established, the real beneficiaries were the emerging bourgeoisie. These, the merchants and bankers of France, had been one of the motive forces in the fight against the monarchy. They had provided the ideas and reasoning for the Revolution. For too long they had suffered unjust taxes, levied on them by a corrupt King. In the aftermath of the French Revolution, with their hands on the reins of power, they remade the laws in their own interest, to benefit trade and those who traded.

But the French Revolution was also crucially different — in a way that would have important overall consequences. Firstly, it ‘was alone of all revolutions which preceded and followed it a mass social revolution’. [6] The masses themselves had been one of the prime forces in its success. At crucial periods in the struggle for power they had, by their very presence, pushed events forward. This had struck a chord with the downtrodden everywhere, but it also taught a crucial lesson: where reform from above proved fruitless, revolution from below could work. In part, as a reflection of this, political consciousness rose across Europe.

The French Revolution was particularly important for a second reason. It occurred as the very early stages of the industrial revolution were getting underway. Overall, wealth in society was increasing. In France and England it is estimated that society’s wealth doubled in the 18 th century. But, in the next fifty years, as machinery and labour were harnessed, the rate of increase in wealth accelerated rapidly.

Beginning first in England, where conditions were most favourable, industrialisation spread relatively quickly to the continent of Europe. By the 1840s ‘the actual industrial transformation of the non-English speaking world was still modest ... a little more than one hundred miles of railway line in the whole of Spain, Portugal, Scandinavia, Switzerland and the entire Balkan peninsula...’ [7] But, even so, ‘the actual rise in production and exports were gigantic’. [8]

What this meant for the ‘rich and privileged’ was a vast increase in their wealth. How vast is often not appreciated. The historian, Eric Hobsbawm, gives one indication with his explanation for the dramatic rise in railway construction that occurred at this time in Britain. In just twenty years railway construction there jumped from just a few dozen miles of line (in the 1820s) to 4,500 miles of line by 1840, to 23,550 miles by 1850. Where, he asks, did the money come from, for such endeavours? His answer is instructive: ‘The fundamental fact about Britain in the first few generations of the Industrial Revolution was that the comfortable and rich classes accumulated income so fast and in such quantities as to exceed all available possibilities of spending and investment’. [9] Hence, the ‘speculative frenzies’ concentrating on railway stock investments which hit England in 1835–7 and again in 1844–7, known with hindsight as ‘railway mania’.

Yet, this enviable predicament contrasted sharply with the lot of the multitude whose role it was to labour for such enterprises. For them ‘...the transition to the new economy created misery and discontent...’ [10] Those without property — those who, in effect, became known as the proletariat — didn’t immediately take to the new order. ‘Labour had to learn to work in a manner suited to industry... It also had to learn to be responsive to monetary incentive...’ [11] The early generations of workers didn’t find this easy, nor did they like it. There was considerable resistance.

The solution, notes Hobsbawm, ‘was found in a draconian labour discipline, but above all in a practice where possible of paying labour so little that it would have to work steadily all through the week in order to make a minimum income...’ [12] that it could survive on. This often required the whole family to work. Between 1834 and 1839, in the English cotton mills, of all workers, ‘one quarter were adult men, one half women and girls and the balance boys below the age of eighteen.’ [13] By the 1840s, in Western Europe, ‘the characteristic social problems of industrialisation ... the horrors of breakneck urbanisation ... were commonplace and of serious dimensions’. [14]

From the 1850s onwards, against a background of great new wealth in society and a working class that was more independent and resourceful, the ‘problem of democracy’ became urgent. In general, wealth was rising throughout society, but so was the greed of those who owned the new factories, mines and plantations. The key question was: what was to be done about the general demand for democracy, and about the incessant clamour for political rights which, during the revolutions of 1848, had almost got completely out of hand?

This matter weighed heavily on the minds of the ‘rich and privileged’ during this era. Two main positions emerged. On the one hand, there were people such as Thomas Babington Macaulay who believed that ‘the higher and middling orders are the natural representatives of the human race’. [16] He was concerned about the issue of enfranchising the poor and property-less. This issue had already come to the fore in Britain with the rise of the Chartist movement in the 1830s. One of the leading Chartists, Cobett, had made the important point that the people wanted the vote ‘that it might do some good, that it might better our situation... and not for the gratification of any abstract ... whim’. [17] Macaulay attacked the idea of universal suffrage in this context. He argued it would lead ‘to the rich being ‘pillaged’ ... which in turn would lead to the destruction of civilisation and a reversion to barbarism.’ [18]

Others were not so obtuse. J.S. Mill, the well known 19 th century liberal philosopher, was among these. He was well aware that times had changed. He noted that the age had passed ‘when the uninstructed have faith in the instructed’ [19] with the result that ‘the multitude are without a guide and society is exposed to all the errors and dangers’. [20] One of these dangers was social revolution. Mill was well aware that something had to be done, but also that the clock could not go backwards.

Not that he was under any illusions: ‘We dreaded the ignorance and especially the selfishness and brutality of the mass.’ [21] The lower orders were, in his eyes, ‘the mass of brutish ignorance’, ‘the common herd’ or ‘the uncultivated herd’. [22] In contrast, he saw himself and his ilk as ‘an endowed class, for the cultivation of learning, and for diffusing its results among the community’. [23] The role of such a class was clear, he said: ‘No government by a democracy ... could rise above a mediocrity except ... by the council and influence of a more highly instructed one or few.’ [24] The alternative, a meaningful say for the ‘common herd’, was inconceivable: ‘It is not useful, but hurtful, that the constitution of the country should declare ignorance to be entitled to as much political power as knowledge.’ [25] A suitable solution then, in Mill’s view, was this: ‘the intellectual classes [should] lead the government, and the government should lead the stupid classes.’ [26]

What would, in time, become the modus operandi of parliamentary democracy everywhere was not in the 1850s immediately practicable. The natural disadvantage suffered by the ‘middling and higher orders’ alongside the ‘brutish multitude’ when it came to the numbers game (‘the rich are few and the poor are many’) was only part of the problem. More pressing was the different expectations that both sides, rich and poor, brought to the particular subject of suffrage and its extension.

Mill, once again, was clear in this regard. Democracy was ‘not that the people govern themselves, but that they have the security for good government’. Such ‘good government’ already existed in his eyes: this was parliament. Hobsbawm notes the state of play in Europe in the middle of the 19 th century: The ‘parliamentary tradition had been established in virtually all European countries, with the exception of Russia. In most cases, however, the power of the traditional elite remained secure if not unchallenged, for parliaments had only nominal power against the executive, and hence were at best weak influences on state policy.’ [27]

These bald facts about parliament and its irrelevance were widely known at the time. Those who attended the various parliaments of Europe were, for the most part, the appointees of the ruling elites throughout Europe — the various sons of the landed classes and of businessmen, lawyers and the other professions. This was hardly the democracy that the ‘stupid classes’ had in mind. On the contrary, the perception was widespread that ‘rule by the people’ must mean just that — hence the dangerous connotations that the word democracy had throughout this period of history.

Mill and others were very much aware of this difference of ‘understanding’ between the rich and the poor. It was a major problem. There was not, in a sense, a ‘tradition of governance’ or, as it was also put, ‘common ground between the rulers and the ruled’ in which both sides knew their place and lot. Naturally, until such traditions were established, the vote would have to be withheld or manipulated into ineffectiveness.

The ‘qualified vote’ was the means by which this was done. Though not before another idea — the ‘weighted vote’ — had been toyed with. This idea, also developed by Mill, was nothing if not novel:

‘If every ordinary unskilled labourer had one vote, a skilled labourer ought to have two. A foreman... whose occupation requires something more of general culture, and some moral as well as intellectual qualities should perhaps have three. A farmer, manufacturer, or trader... should have three or four. A member of any profession, requiring... systematic mental culture... ought to have five or six. A graduate of any university at least as many.’ [28]

In this way the numerical disadvantage of the rich could be mitigated until such time as the poor had accepted their lot.

But, it was not to be. The qualified vote was far more practical. Using any arbitrary difference — educational level, possession of property, religion, race, skin colour, sex, age — access to the vote was curtailed. Until such time as people showed appropriate ‘maturity’. Gladstone, the British Prime-minister, spelled out what ‘maturity’ entailed during a debate in 1864 on whether the franchise should be extended (from 4% to 8% of the population!) The voter, Gladstone said, should be a person with ‘self-command, self control, respect for order, patience under suffering, confidence in the law and regard for superiors.’ [29]

Between 1850 and 1950 then, a period of one hundred years, the main modern parliamentary democracies emerged in western Europe, north America, Australia and New Zealand. The situation in these countries changed from one in which Parliament (or the Legislature as it was also know) was elected by only 1–5% of the adult population to one in which almost 100% were involved. This slow pace reflected the overall problems associated with the building of ‘traditions of governance’ between the rulers (the ‘rich and privileged’) and the ruled (the labouring classes), given both the social problems of the era and the continuing massive inequality. It was however, though slow, a broadly successful process relying on two important developments apart from the usual method — repression — for success. These were:

The emergence of a compliant parliamentary socialist movement.

The growth and influence of the mass media which from early days was attendant to the interests and agenda of the ‘rich and privileged’.

Maintaining their privilege and wealth while generally conceding a semblance of democracy was the principal aim of the ‘rich and privileged’ during the second half of the 19 th century. But patience with this was thin on the ground, especially amongst the ‘multitude’ who were, as always, ‘truculent and overly concerned with who got what’. This impatience broke out in full force in France, once again, with the famous events of the Paris Commune (1871), which, even by today’s standard, remain a benchmark in the achievement of democratic practice.

The Commune, though short-lived, broke with the past in a number of obvious and direct ways that met with the popular mood of revolution. ‘Those elected to represent the people were to act as delegates, not as parliamentary members ... Those elected were subject to recall by the people, and it was the duty of those elected to report back and remain in constant contact with the sources of popular sovereignty.’ [30] This was like nothing else that existed in the world at that time. ‘The police was at once stripped of its political attributes ... So were the officials of all other branches of the Administration. From the members of the Commune down, the public service had to be done at workman’s wages.’ [31]

This was a system of administration that led the Commune to institute or attempt to institute reforms of a very radical nature — worker co-operatives were formed, plans were drawn up for workers’ control of industry, special attention was paid to the provision of basic education for all, to improve the position of women and to provide crèche facilities for workers (near their place of work). [32] For the time it was an enormous achievement.

But if the Commune highlighted anything — generally speaking as an example of democracy it was vilified by the ‘rich and privileged’ — it was that the real threat in society to the continuance of privilege no longer emanated from the ‘general masses’ but rather from that more specific quantity, the working-class. How to deal with this entity was further complicated by the still small but growing influence of anarchist and socialist ideas in its ranks. An influence that was clearly evident in the events of the Commune.

Repression, the immediate solution to the Commune (approximately 25,000 Parisians were slaughtered [33] ), would not do in the longer term, especially given, even in this period, the evident capacity of workers to articulate and defend their own interests. Indeed, this was perceived to be the real danger of the emerging working-class — its independence and autonomy which set it apart from all other producing classes in society heretofore, most notably the peasantry.

For the ‘rich and privileged’ then, containing this new found independence of workers and, if possible, dispersing it would be crucial aims in the general struggle against democracy. Unless this was done a society more technologically based than ever before would, in time, become dangerously vulnerable to its most important of constituents — its workers. Even in the late 19 th century, the direction of economic development was pointing to this worst of scenarios, where, irrespective of the interests of the rich, workers might be powerful enough to implement democracy anyway.

What was confirming a still small but growing number of workers in such dangerous ‘delusions’ was the very process of industrial struggle itself which became an important feature as the 19 th century continued on into the 20 th . In confronting the owners of industry, workers had, right from the beginning, very little to rely upon. Against the brute force and superior material resources of the wealthy, workers had only organisation and solidarity to hold them together — this they used to full effect.

By forming themselves into unions and syndicates (organisations that were built systematically throughout this period) workers were able to use their industrial power to full effect. But there was, most importantly, an added bonus. Unions and syndicates were in their own right ‘schools of democracy’ and political learning. Not only did workers became politicised by getting involved, but also by being part of a union, workers were given valuable lessons in democratic administration. As if this was not bad enough, it was through such involvement that workers were — when successful — confirmed in that most dangerous of ideas: that by their own efforts and organisation they could alleviate their exploitation. An idea which, if left unchecked, could be the basis for far more substantial undertakings.

Industrial struggle then was a crucial means by which a revolutionary consciousness was developing among the working-class. The practical political experience being gained there was also influencing the wider struggle for democratic reform. In a similar way, the wider struggle for democracy was also influencing the demands in the workplace. A feature that was clearly evident in the ‘proposal’ put forward by coal workers in the Rhondda Valley of Wales in 1912:

‘Our only concern is to see to it, that those who create the value receive it ... Today the shareholders own and rule the coal fields. They own and rule them mainly through paid officials. The men of the mines are surely as competent to elect these, as shareholders who may never have seen a colliery. To have a vote in determining who shall be your fireman, manager, inspector, etc. is to have a vote in determining the conditions which rule your working life. On that vote will depend in a large measure your safety of life and limb, of your freedom from repression by petty bosses, and would give you an intelligent interest in and control over your conditions of work.’ [34]

Such ideas were indeed dangerous. The notion that democracy should be a part of work and the workplace as much as it should be a part of any other aspect of life directly challenged the rule of the boss. Particularly so when married to notions of industrial strength and union solidarity which were developing at this time. In this context it was crucial for the ‘rich and privileged’ to divert the political aspirations of workers away from the industrial arena and towards some more benign institution. Parliament was custom built for this job.

Alone on the left, anarchists signalled the danger which the lure of the Parliament would in time become. One the one hand there was the crucial question: what could Parliament actually achieve or change given that it had only ‘nominal powers’? What would be the point in gaining control of it, if this control could effect little real change?

Though these questions were very important, they were accompanied by a more general debate about the nature of democracy and the role of the State. The real division of the day was between two views. Between that which saw ‘the State’ as a beneficial agent in society and that (held by anarchists and some marxists) which saw it, on the contrary, as an impediment to social and economic progress of any substantial kind.

The burgeoning social reform movement of the era, which in time would be dominated by the various Labour and Socialist parties of the world, was the principal advocate of the idea that ‘the State’ could be used to benefit workers and the disenfranchised generally. Lassalle, the founding father of the German Social Democratic Party (GSDP), held that social improvement of any substantial kind could only come about from State intervention. This was the ‘great prize’ to be had if workers and their representatives played the game of Parliament. Towards this end, Lassalle urged the German workers ‘to look [neither] to the left nor to the right and to be deaf to everything except universal franchise and the secret ballot’. [35]

Lassalle was no exception in holding this view. In Britain, the Fabians, a formative force in the Labour Party, had a similar outlook, believing that ‘the State was fundamentally neutral ... It could be used to hinder progress or ... to further the evolution of humanity towards its collectivist goals. The problem was merely which class was in control of its function...’ [36] As they saw it, ‘the state machine of army, police and law courts ‘will continue to be used against the people by [the rich] classes until it is used by the people against the [the rich] classes...’ [37]

The anarchist view, however, was quite different, and, as time would tell, more realistic. As the anarchists pointed out, ‘the State’, in essence, was a chain of command. Democratic practices animated none of its many segments and sections. The Parliament, moreover, was but a minor part of any Government. And the Government was but a minor part of a much wider body that also included the army, the police and judiciary. All of which were authoritarian in terms of structure and ethos. How could such bodies be used to benefit society at large?

The argument put by Lassalle and others was that if a more ‘enlightened’ or ‘compassionate’ leadership took the helm, more beneficial ends could be achieved. But the anarchist view rejected this. Not because they doubted either the ‘compassion’ or ‘enlightenment’ of Lassalle, though it was questionable, but because, as they argued, authoritarian institutions could not be used to bring about democratic objectives (i.e. policies that would lead to wealth distribution, the key issue, could not be brought about by a minority, no matter how well intentioned. Rather the active and democratic involvement of all of society was required to achieve such an end.)

For anarchists then, the views and beliefs of reformers were not decisive. What would determine the outcome was the political structures used to bring about change. For the anarchists ‘the State’ was not neutral. It was authoritarian and undemocratic as befitted its purpose. Lassalle, as the anarchists saw it, would not change the direction of Government or ‘the State’ if he was elected. Rather it would change him. He would become authoritarian and self-serving as befitted the institution he was being empowered to run.

Meanwhile, the real problem remained. The crucial issue for the ‘rich and privileged’ was how to concede a semblance of democracy while keeping the mass of people as far removed from the levers of power as was practically possible. In this way the business of making money could be got on with, while the demands for a meaningful democracy were diverted into a cul de sac.

Parliament, as stated above, was the method of choice. It had nominal powers and concerned itself with the mundane. The real issues in society — the accumulation of wealth by a few, the massive exploitation of labour, the draconian rule of the boss in the workplace — hardly graced its doorstep. Therein lay its beauty. But therein also lay its weakness. The gap between the institutions of power — the State and Government — and the huge numbers of people living in poverty was massive in the last half of the 19 th century and early 20 th . The prestige of parliament was low. As an institution it was viewed with suspicion, and as a plaything for the rich. How, it was asked, could such an institution bring about fundamental reform? Or, for that matter, a major redistribution of wealth?

Throughout the period this was an important limitation — in most countries. In order to channel the broader demands for democracy and political rights in a safer direction, it was necessary in the first place to build up the perception that ‘Parliament’ was democracy in action.

Similarly, while suffrage was gradually conceded, it was done so in a reluctant and strategic way. Extensions of voting rights were met with expressions of ‘grave concern for the future of society’. In turn, the ‘stupid classes’, women or black people — anyone whose turn it was — were chastised with: Were they capable of understanding political issues? Could they be objective? Would it mean the end of society as it was then known?

These questions were debated intensely during the era of reform (1850–1950) that culminated in the establishment of the main modern parliamentary democracies. But, from the very beginning, as a general process reform proceeded furthest and with greatest speed in the countries of the so-called ‘New World’. These states — the USA, Canada, New Zealand and Australia — extended the popular franchise quickly, in part because of their special circumstances. Being countries that were built up on the theft of land (from their indigenous peoples) they commanded greater loyalty from their (usually) white citizenry than was possible in Europe itself. A loyalty that was, in effect, a further safeguard to the economic interests of the ‘rich and privileged’.

The general process of extending suffrage to ‘the masses’ was perceived to be dangerous, and so it was. For this very reason it could not have proceeded successfully without substantial participation from below. This participation was provided by the emerging ‘parliamentary socialist’ movement which, from early days, had a view of social change and reform not radically different from that which was tolerable to the ‘rich and privileged’.

There were two important and essential components to this. Firstly, as was mentioned above, the ‘parliamentary socialists’ saw the State and its role as all important. Leaving aside the objections of the anarchists and some marxists, they viewed ‘the State’ with a degree of respect that bordered on awe. In many respects the parliamentary socialists were more attached to the idea of ‘the State’ than the very capitalists who had relied upon it, time and time again, as a means of repression. They saw control of ‘the State’ and its chain of command as all important and a desirable goal in its own right.

Secondly, however, there was the question of the ‘multitude’ and what role they should have in any future society. Were they to be participants, citizens who were active in bringing about change or were they to be simply people who were called upon to vote every few years — with little other input? Which was it to be: active and participatory or passive and in the background? Here the views of the ‘rich and privileged’ and the parliamentary socialists also coincided.

At one level there was disdain. Beatrice Webb, a member of the Fabians and a founder member of the British Labour Party, ‘was horrified at the immorality and mental dullness of the lower orders. At the turn of the century she noted, “To us, public affairs seem gloomy; the middle classes are materialistic, and the working classes stupid, and in large sections sottish, with no interest except in racing odds.” [38]

At another level however there was doubt about the political capacity of the working-class. The Fabians in general were influential in the founding of the British Labour Party, but they could not imagine workers originating political ideas of their own. ‘The utmost function that can be allotted to a mass meeting [of workers] in a democracy is the ratification or rejection of a policy already prepared for it.’ [39] A view that was also held by Eduard Bernstein [40] , a key figure in the GSPD, and also, interestingly, by the Russian revolutionary, Lenin, who had noted that workers were only capable of ‘trade union consciousness’. [41]

Nevertheless, the growth of the ‘parliamentary socialist’ movement in the latter part of the 19 th century and the beginning of the 20 th was meteoric. Across Europe, in South America and in Australia socialist parties were formed with the expressed aim of taking power.

Nowhere was the growth more impressive than in Germany. The GSPD ‘increased its vote from 125,000 in 1871 to 1.4 million in 1890 (20 per cent of the total vote) and to 4.2 million in 1912 (35 per cent of the total vote). Similar dramatic increases in the socialist vote occurred elsewhere ... Social Democrats obtained 37 percent of the vote in Finland in 1907, 40 per cent in Austria in 1919, 30 per cent in Belgium in 1925 and 46 per cent in Denmark by 1935.’ [42] In 1910 the first elected socialist government in the world came to power in Australia.

These results were indeed dramatic, an indication no doubt of the desire in this period for real and substantial change, or wealth distribution. It seemed as if great things were in the offing, a view enthusiastically voiced by Frederick Engels in 1895. Engels, co-author with Marx of the ‘Communist Manifesto’, could only marvel at the growth of the German SPD. He seemed to believe that all things would fall before the emerging giant of ‘parliamentary socialism’ :

Its growth proceeds as spontaneously , as steadily, as irrepressibly, and at times as tranquilly as a natural process. All Government intervention has proved powerless against it ...If it continues in this fashion, by the end of the century we shall ...grow into the decisive power in the land, before which all powers will have to bow, whether they like it or not.’ [43]

Such a message was also carried faithfully to the working-class electorate by the thousands of party activists who joined the various socialist parties during this era, often to the neglect of the trade union movement they left behind. Keir Hardie, a formative figure in the Labour Party in Britain, was an early hero in this mould. Hardie himself, in the personal sense, was no stranger to oppression. Born illegitimate to a farm servant from Lanarkshire in Scotland, he criss-crossed England, Scotland and Wales building support for the parliamentary road to change. He was, in every respect, an eloquent speaker with, it seemed, a radical vision. He described the type of socialism he was fighting for as follows:

‘...the ugliness and squalor which now meets you at every turn in some of the most beautiful valleys in the world would disappear, the rivers would run pure and clear as they did of yore ... and in the winter the log would glow on the fire the while that the youths and the maidens made glad the heart with mirth and song, and there would be beauty and joy everywhere.’ [44]

In his eyes the important thing was to participate in the electoral process. Parliament was a good institution, with real power and the potential to satisfy the democratic wishes of the people. The problem, as he saw it, was that rich people kept getting elected to its hallowed halls. If this could be changed, if people from a working-class background, who knew what it was like to be poor were elected, then things could be changed. As went the ditty, popularised among Australian workers at the beginning of the 20 th century to win support for the Australian Labour Party (ALP) [45] :

‘Then keep your heads I say my boys; your comrades in the town.

The ballot is the thing, my boys, the ballot is the thing...’

The ballot, in other words, became everything. ‘Until the First World War, Social Democratic Parties worked mainly to obtain democratic reforms such as the extension of the suffrage, first to males, then to women, as well as seeking the secret ballot, equal constituencies and “one man, one vote”.’ [46] Particularly in the northern European countries this prioritising affected the whole social struggle. Labour and socialist parties not only set the agenda but also they tended to foist this agenda, with greater and lesser degrees of success, on the wider trade union movement.

Thus the real threat posed by industrial based struggles was at first moderated, then later dispersed. In many countries workers played a militant part in winning an extension of the franchise. In Belgium, Austria and Finland among others, general strikes ushered in more extensive voting rights. But, at the end of the day, the workers’ role was secondary. Once representation in Parliament was achieved the job of building socialism fell into the ‘capable’ hands of the parliamentary socialists. A convenient outcome as it turned out.

For the ‘parliamentary socialists’ the great prize had always been to win control of the State. Through enlightened leadership, they argued, the State could be used for the benefit of society at large. What happened in reality?

From the earliest days divisions occurred. The demands of electoralism were all important and, as early as 1890, Bernstein in Germany signalled the importance of this issue. Declaring that democracy was ‘the high-school of compromise’ he argued successfully in the German SDP for a policy of moderation and alliance with forces that did not share in the desire for fundamental wealth distribution. The eventual aim was still socialism, he argued, but for the present the immediate goals must take precedence:

“For me the achievement of the most immediate demands is the main thing, not only because they are of great propagandist value and serve to enlist the masses, but also because, in my opinion, this gradual process, this gradual socialisation, is the method strongly indicated for a progressive transition.” [47]
