---
title: "The Fruits of “Arab Spring”"
author: "Yeghia Tashjian"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yeghia-tashjian-the-fruits-of-arab-spring"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Islamism, Anarchism & Feminism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yeghia-tashjian-the-fruits-of-arab-spring.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yeghia-tashjian-the-fruits-of-arab-spring.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Action and reaction        From “down with the regime” to “down with capitalism”        The revolutionary Arab women        In conclusion According to Fatima Mernissi, a Moroccan feminist writer, the confusion between Islam as a belief and Islam as a state religion contributed greatly on the failure of the Leftist-Secular movements in the Arab world [1] . The corruption and the authoritarianism of these movements, the regimes, lead to the explosion of popular movements, sometimes peaceful and others in form of violent uprisings, demanding the overthrow of these regimes. As the “Arab Spring” broke out many of the head of these states were ousted from power, though the “taste” of the regimes remained such as in Egypt and Tunisia, where democratically elected “Islamo-Fascism” [2] emerged. These movements, whether the Muslim Brotherhood or al-Nahda tried to control the resources of the government and oppressed the secular leftists, ignored the rights of women and tried to sideline the secular revolutionaries by the use of force. As a result opposition groups influenced by the protest movements in Europe, tried to organize themselves thus new ideologies emerged in the Arab world; Anarchism and Feminism both tried to challenge the power of “Islamo-Fascism” in the region. Islamist movements such as Muslim Brotherhood and Salafists are not newcomers to our region. MB emerged in 1928 as Pan-Islamist movement, founded by Hassan al-Banna. Al-Banna described the Brotherhood as, “a Salafiyya message, a Sunni way, a Sufi truth, a political organization, an athletic group, a cultural- educational union, an economic company, and a social idea”. [3] During 1970-80s their members were persecuted by the Secular-Nationalist forces in Egypt, Syria and Tunisia. Meanwhile the roots of Salafist movements came from Saudi Arabia and are divided to several branches, the most dangerous one is the Wahabi-Jihadi branch. As uprisings exploded in Tunisia and Egypt, Islamist movements and parties re-emerged in the political arena and brought a majority in the parliament, in Egypt they also won the presidential elections. The unified, weak and disorganized secularist forces started to accuse Islamists of “Islamization” of their societies. The ideological clash reached its pick, between the secularists and Islamists, during the drafting of constitutions. The major conflict was around the image of the state and women rights, whether it was a civil or Islamist state and whether women were treated equally or subject to Islamic Shari’a. During the Egyptian presidential elections a statement declared by the Egyptian branch of Muslim Brotherhood stated; “Women have the right to occupy all positions except the office of presidency” this was something which is not very different from the Salafist statements, these two parties had women candidates in their electoral blocs but always explain that women rights and duties should not contradict the Islamic law. The Egyptian branch of Muslim Brotherhood stated in its electoral program ; “Ensuring women’s access to all their rights, consistent with the values of Islamic law, maintaining the balance between their duties and right’s’’ . [4] After the elections many Egyptian revolutionary movements accused the Freedom and Justice party (Egyptian party of MB) of shifting from the goals of Egyptian revolution. The problem is that the Islamic Law, Sharia is not the same as with what the world knows as “women rights” in our modern age or the rights that form part of the International Bill of Human Rights. In addition, the “duties of women”, as claimed by the Muslim Brotherhood, is clear that it does not see women rights as natural and inalienable. It claims that their rights must be restricted by Sharia and their duties in society; duties which are in themselves dictated by Sharia . Moreover the marginalization of the Egyptian opposition and the assassination of the head of the Tunisian leftist opposition raised serious quest…
