---
title: "Charter of the Awareness League"
author: "Awareness League"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/awareness-league-charter-of-the-awareness-league"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "http://struggle.ws/africa/aware.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "awareness-league-charter-of-the-awareness-league.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/awareness-league-charter-of-the-awareness-league.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1. INTRODUCTION:        2. PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES:        3. MEMBERSHIP        4. ORGANS:        5. PRINCIPAL OFFICERS:          (i) National Co-ordinator:          (ii) Secretary General          (iii) Financial secretary          (iv) Assistant Secretary        6. FUND:        7. PUBLICATIONS: The AWARENESS LEAGUE, NIGERIA, was founded as a social libertarian organisation inspired by and committed to the ideals, principles, objectives, goals, ends and purposes of revolutionary socialism and anarcho-syndicalism, characterised as the anti-theses of statism as well as their manifestations and institutions thereof. With capitalism enmeshed in interminable crisis and its institutions - social, economic, political and cultural - increasingly succumbing to fatigue across the globe, the imperative for sustained struggle against the forces of capitalism has never been greater. It is instructive to note that the crisis of capitalism has been most intensive and pronounced in the underdeveloped third world countries. This is not surprising, to say the least: capitalism's chain was bound to break at its weakest links. Essentially, however, the crisis of capitalism as well as its contradictions retain a global character expressed everywhere in burgeoning deficits and external debts, trade wars, rising cost of living and declining standard of living worldwide, industrial stagnation and institutional decay. Inherent in capitalism's crisis is the ever-present contradiction between labour and capital. The process of this development takes the form of class conflicts. At every point in time, the dominant class in society seeks to exploit its access to the means of production to appropriate a disproportionate value of social production to the benefit of its membership whose prerogative it is also, to decide what is to be produced, how and when. Since they do not have any interest in preserving the prevailing order the disadvantaged (class (es)), on the other hand, persist in fighting for the overthrow of the system and the enthroning of a people-based order. AWARENESS LEAGUE believes that an understanding of the structure, values, reflexes and tendencies of the capitalist mode of production in all its ramifications is crucial to understanding the origins and direction of the present crisis - including the class relations of production. Indeed the cross current of economic ruptures such as inflation, unemployment and mass poverty set in motion by this development are necessary outcomes of the unequal and exploitative character of the global capitalist intercourse expressed in the third world's peripheral participation in it. Attempts so far to comprehend the crisis of capitalism have tended to exhibit an obsession with equilibrium in a world economy that has demonstrated an incredible capacity for change. The approach fails to recognise the fundamental conflicts in production; the struggle for the control of surplus by the various arms and agencies of capital as well as the state which is central to capitalist production and crisis. This is where revolutionary syndicalism comes in. In contradistinction to the evils and failings of capital, AWARENESS LEAGUE posits syndicalism as a qualitatively superior alternative with capacity for a revolutionary transformation of society. Revolutionary syndicalism emphasises the overriding place of class unity, class cohesion and class consciousness among all workers, the peasantry and all other exploited social groups. The primacy of sustained class struggle as an instrument of liberation from the yoke of capital is underlined by the fact that capitalism and capitalists will not give up without some fight. The ends of class struggle as AWARENESS LEAGUE perceives it, constitute in the abolition of the state system, its structures, institutions, values, privileges and manifestations such as elections and political systems and legislative and judicial processes; their replacement with self-managing, self…
