---
title: "Burn Down the Psych Ward"
author: "Psychological Emancipation for Revolutionary Abolition (PERA)"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pera-burn-down-the-psych-ward"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "call for an abolitionist approach to psychological emancipation"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "pera-burn-down-the-psych-ward.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pera-burn-down-the-psych-ward.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Three Pillars of PERA        Psychological emancipation        Revolution        Abolition        Burn down the Psych Ward The American plantation relies on the mental distress of those it oppresses. As revolutionaries, we seek the liberation of people in bondage, both in prisons and psych wards. In order to eliminate patriarchy, capitalism, gender, and anti-blackness, we must address the significant psychological damage these forces inflict. The trauma caused by social isolation, psychological manipulation and physical oppression is felt by all of those who are locked up, enslaved and otherwise targeted by the barbaric enforcers of white supremacy. The rampant psychological distress we are accustomed to is the effect of living in a depraved world. It is not possible to address “mental illness” without addressing the overwhelmingly reactionary nature of American society. Psychological Emancipation for Revolutionary Abolition seeks to create ways of dealing with psychological distress which build up the revolutionary relationships that are needed to help people stay free. We must not only be supporting our fellow revolutionaries in their time of psychological need, but developing the patterns and practices of social cohesion that create strong bonds more capable of withstanding state repression, dealing with psychological distress, and undertaking militant action. The skills, ideas and methods of organization proposed in this call for a revolutionary abolitionist approach to psychological emancipation will beuseful to anyone seeking to overcome the psychological barriers to securing their own liberation, but the ultimate goal of PERA is to destroy locked psychiatric treatment, prisons, and the state itself. This means that to truly succeed PERA requires support from and coordination with a broader abolitionist network, the Revolutionary Abolitionist Movement. This call for a revolutionary abolitionist approach to psychological emancipation is structured around three pillars, each related to a different aspect of active struggle against psychological distress. Psychological Emancipation Learn psychological skills which can help us become better revolutionaries. Revolutionary Develop psychological affinity groups to support one another, as we face psychological distress. Abolition Destroy the current system of mental health care, which holds mentally ill people against their will in both prisons and psych wards. Psychological self defense is a necessary part of revolutionary struggle, and psychological skills are necessary for withstanding the challenges all revolutionaries face. To bring our unique talents and individual experiences to the struggle for liberation, we must remove the psychological roadblocks that hinder our effectiveness. Living on the American plantation is psychologically damaging, and being mentally ill here can be physically damaging, or deadly. The carceral state extends to our ways of treating mental illness; from the mentally ill in traditional jails and prisons, to those in locked psych wards, the end of this prison state must include straitjackets as well as shackles. In traditional mental health treatment, success is most often measured by how well people are able to fit into the expectations of society. For PERA, instead the goal is to provide the psychological tools necessary for revolutionaries to fight for our own freedom. To build a world without oppression, we must kill the master within, and harden our minds against the assaults of the state and capitalism. In order to grow as a revolutionary movement, we need to support comrades who are facing the psychological effects of this prison society. Psychological affinity can form a basis for building up revolutionary capacity. Not only can we help one another through periods of crisis or distress, but we can form strong relationships based on shared values and emancipatory goals. This isn’t just something that will have a positive effect on our…
