---
title: "From the Russian Revolution of 1917 to Stalinist Totalitarianism"
author: "Agustin Guillamón"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/agustin-guillamon-from-the-russian-revolution-of-1917-to-stalinist-totalitarianism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "[Bibliography, which consists of Spanish language books, is omitted from this translation—Translator’s Note] [Text is not dated; the most recent publication date in the Spanish-language bibliography at the end of the text is 2006] Translated from the Spanish. https://libcom.org/history/russian-revol"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "agustin-guillamon-from-the-russian-revolution-of-1917-to-stalinist-totalitarianism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/agustin-guillamon-from-the-russian-revolution-of-1917-to-stalinist-totalitarianism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction      The Three Conceptions of the Russian Revolution before 1917      From 1905 to the First World War      The Disasters of the War      The February Revolution      The Provisional Government      The April Theses      From July to October      The October Revolution      The Bolshevik Regime      The Civil War and War Communism (1918-1921)      The NEP (1921-1927)      The Triumph of the Stalinist Bureaucracy      The International Characteristics of Stalinism      Conclusions      Epilogue: The Communist Left Against Stalinism and Leninist Ideology The Russian Revolution is the most important historical event of the 20th century, and for some historians it is even accounted as one of the great events of human history. Its influence on international relations, political ideologies and word history from 1917 to 1991 is indisputable. Trotsky, in the preface of his History of the Russian Revolution , claimed that “[t]he most indubitable feature of a revolution is the direct interference of the masses in historical events” and the acceleration, over brief periods of time, of the pace of economic, social and political change, in addition to the emergence of radically opposed political poles, and the shift of the social support of the masses towards parties of an increasingly extremist type. The Russian Revolution must not be understood as a mere coup d’état, reduced to the storming of the Winter Palace, but as a historical process that began with Bloody Sunday and the revolutionary events of 1905, and underwent an uninterrupted period of development until the mid-1920s. The Russian Social Democracy, split since 1903 between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks over organizational issues, displayed three distinct analyses of the nature of the revolutionary process that began in 1905: Plekhanov’s analysis (Menshevik), Lenin’s (Bolshevik) and Trotsky’s. For Plekhanov, the revolution could only be bourgeois. The state would cease to be led by the feudal nobility and would pass into the hands of the bourgeoisie. Once the bourgeoisie was securely in power, the workers will follow the democratic and parliamentarian road, in order to gradually obtain a larger and larger share of power, until they finally establish socialism in a uncertain and distant future. Lenin admitted the bourgeois character of the revolution, but denied that it would have to be led by the bourgeoisie, which in Russia was too weak to confront the nobility. He proposed the workers and peasants alliance as the only means that could possibly create a revolutionary power, one that would carry out a profound agrarian reform without, however, abolishing the capitalist structures. With the development and consolidation of capitalism in backward Russia, the proletariat would increase in numbers and would become so strong that the time would come when it would take power and begin to build socialism. Trotsky’s position, which is distinct from both the Bolshevik and Menshevik positions, asserted that the workers were already capable of taking power, and diverged from Lenin’s position in that he thought that the absence of the objective conditions for first stages of the construction of socialism would be compensated for by the permanent character of the revolution, which would make it possible to skip the intermediate stages, which the Marxist theoreticians considered to be necessary, in order to pass directly from the bourgeois revolution to the socialist revolution. Lenin advocated Trotsky’s position in the so-called April Theses (1917), in opposition to the immense majority of the Bolsheviks, who argued for the exclusively bourgeois character of the February Revolution. The Russo-Japanese War was a military and economic disaster of enormous proportions, and unleashed a wave of popular protest that became the first stage of the Russian revolutionary process. On January 3, 1905, the strike at the Putilov works in Saint Petersburg began. On Sunday, January 9 (“Bloody …
