---
title: "COPEI"
author: "El Combate, Tommy Lawson, Uruguayan Anarchist Federation"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-copei"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Campy Sino, 2022. Translated from federacionanarquistauruguaya.uy/copei-1a-parte-documentos-de-fau-1972 and federacionanarquistauruguaya.uy/copei-2a-parte-documentos-de-fau-1972 Retrieved on 2022-04-09 from redblacknotes.com/2022/04/02/copei-commentary-on-armed-struggle-and-foquismo-in"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-copei.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-copei.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federacion-anarquista-uruguaya-copei)

The following is the first English translation of the entirety of “COPEI,” an internal strategy document of the clandestine Federación Anarquista Uruguaya (FAU) written in 1972.

COPEI is a significant document for a number of reasons. Firstly, as the organisation that articulated the strategy of Especifismo, the works and insights of the FAU are critical to understanding the trajectory and development of the tendency. Especifismo being the theory of the ‘specific anarchist organisation’ employing federalist practices and united by theoretical and strategic coherency. Especifist organisations organise around a programme and are dedicated to class struggle and the building of popular mass movements autonomous from capitalists and reformist political parties. Especifismo is considered as similar to the other anarchist tendencies known as Platformism and Dual Organisationalism, only developed in the unique context of Uruguay and spread across Latin America.

Throughout the 1950’s to the 1970s the FAU showed a level of strategic sophistication relatively unknown amongst other anarchist federations. Nuance and impressive levels of organisation were required to combine and co-ordinate the activities of the clandestine anarchist ‘party’, the FAU, with the above-ground mass work of the Resistencia Obrero Estudiantil (Workers-Student Resistance — ROE), the Tendencia Combativa (Combative Tendency) union faction and the armed apparatus of the Organización Popular Revolucionaria (Popular Revolutionary Organisation, OPR-33). Hence for the FAU, ‘the structuring of the Political Organisation is a fundamental task in the stages to mold the conditions for the insurrection.’ The structuring of the political apparatus being after all, the key insight of especifismo as popular insurrection is the method of anarchism.

Today, understanding the way that the armed apparatus of a revolutionary organisation was integrated into the overall project of social revolution is an often unstudied aspect of the revolutionary project. Material conditions have changed in such a manner that even the possibility of urban guerrillas are rendered redundant across much of the world. However history is not static and we do not know what will emerge from a world beset by new imperialisms, the collapse of eco-systems under rapid climate change, new wars, pandemics, and ever higher levels of inequality. The strategic dimensions that will result from these new contradictions are as yet unknown, and it is worthwhile revolutionaries keep an open mind studying the past.

In 1960’s Latin America, it was believed that revolutionary prospects had been opened up by the guerrilla war in Cuba and the subsequent overthrow of the Batista regime. Across the continent armed groups sprung up attempting to imitate the successes of the Cuban movement. In fact, new guerrilla wars were often sponsored by the Cubans themselves. Che Guevara declared the need for ‘two, three, many Vietnams’ to defeat US Imperialism. In Uruguay, a number of sympathetic groups created a coalition called El Coordinador . The FAU were amongst the organisations involved, alongside groups like the Tupamaros. The political line of El Coordinador was argued through its journal, Epocha, which articulated the use of armed struggle against the Uruguayan state and US imperialism. While all groups involved agreed on the use of armed struggle, the FAU disassociated from Epocha following the first action, a raid on the Swiss Rifle Club. Within a short period all the organisations associated with the raid would also be forced underground, declared illegal by a regime moving rapidly towards dictatorship.

The FAU had become highly critical of the “focuista” strategy imitated by the other revolutionary organisations in Uruguay. “Foquismo” was the name given to the strategy developed by Che Guevara in his manual, Guerrilla Warfare . Essentially his thesis can be broken down thus; the objective conditions for revolution already existed in Latin America due to the contradictions exacerbated by US imperialism. All that was needed was a small group of revolutionaries to engage in armed confrontation with the state and the subsequent war would encourage the subjective conditions leading to social revolution. Importantly, in Che’s vision the political aspects of the struggle are subordinate to the armed struggle. In Uruguay the primary Focuista organisation were the Tupamaros, also a focus of critique in the document.

This is the second reason COPEI is seminal. Despite supporting and engaging in armed struggle, the FAU believed Foquismo to be a flawed strategy. In contrast to the foquistas, who saw the guerrilla as the par excellence of revolutionary organisation, the FAU saw ‘the function of an urban guerrilla [as] not to achieve victory after a direct confrontation with the army’ but as a ‘necessary preamble and preparation for the insurrection.’ Ultimately, ‘armed actions are conceived through a political center, and not a political center conceived through armed actions.’ That is, the opposite of the thesis of Foquismo. For ‘the foquista conception is interested in the masses almost exclusively as support and cover for the specifically military action. They are not interested in the participation of the masses as the protagonists of the revolutionary process.’ However, in the vision of the FAU, the revolution must be made by the workers, with the guerrilla as one aspect of preparation for the mass insurrection; ‘revolutionary military policy will therefore be a class military policy, which in all its stages must coincide with the interests of the industrial working class and other working classes.’

The final aspect in which COPEI stands out as a seminal document is its trenchant critique of reformist politics. Indeed, the whole purpose of employing armed struggle as an aspect of the revolutionary movement is to break with the limitations of bourgeois politics; ‘the capitalist system will not be destroyed following the rules of the game that they generated themselves to guarantee its continuity. The continuity of the system is maintained by reducing action to only that which bourgeois legality allows, only what the legality created and managed by the bourgeoisie recommends.’ Social democratic and other reformist forces, including the Uruguayan Communist Party at the time, were limiting the possibilities opened up by an inevitable crisis and clash with the capitalist state. ‘By turning the idea of ​​the “proletarian insurrection” into a myth, the reformists make it into a legitimating pretext for their counterrevolutionary practice, so useful to the system. Far from representing an alternative opposed to it, aimed at destroying it, it becomes daily practice, in concrete and everyday events and in a way “perfects” it, by correcting it in its most extreme and visible manifestations of injustice.” This would become visible during the waves of strikes that gripped pre-dictatorship Uruguay, where the Communist party channeled everything into failed electoral efforts while the FAU and the Tendencia did everything it could to prepare the workers for insurrection. As Abraham Guillen noted ‘OPR-33 and ROE spurred a series of successful strikes in the metallurgical, rubber and clothing industries. The strike at SERAL, a footwear manufacturer, lasted more than a year. Where the Communist controlled unions failed, OPR-33 and ROE succeeded.’

The new translation of COPEI is part of a discovery of the depth of the history of Latin American anarchism. A region where anarchism has perhaps, at least as influential if not more so than in Europe.

In 2018, a partial translation was provided by Gabriel Ascui and published on the website of Black Rose / Rosa Negra Anarchist Federation in the United States. This new translation by comrade “Campy Sino” provides footnotes to convey the context of colloquial Uruguayan language and clarify military terms.

In 1967 the Uruguayan government ordered the dissolution of the Uruguayan Anarchist Federation (FAU), which then went underground until 1971. Its activity was restructured according to the new situation: the development of an armed apparatus, the publication of a clandestine weekly, the creation of a network of safehouses for operation and advertising materials, financing and others. The OPR-33 (Organización Popular Revolucionaria-33 Orientales) was launched and as the armed wing of the FAU, it carried out a series of quite successful actions: sabotage, economic expropriation, kidnapping of political leaders and employers, armed support for strikes, factory occupations, etc. With this document of revolutionary military strategy, they also exercise criticism and self-criticism of the foco strategy as used by the National Liberation Movement (MLN), the Tupamaros.

Important events have occurred in recent months. Events that introduce significant enough variables, as to justify a reassessment of tactics, which in turn demands an adjustment to the new context created by these events. No doubt, one of the most important aspects has been the repressive offensive and its effects, which are already clear enough It seems a priority, before entering into any consideration to make a balance, necessarily synthetic, of those effects of the repressive campaign on the National Liberation Movement (MLN)…and this is our main objective.

Schematically, the results obtained by the repression can be expressed as follows:

They managed to dismantle their infrastructure in a serious way (premises, hidden caches and guerilla engineering, [1] vehicles , etc.).

Much of the armament and safehouses fell into the hands of repression.

A large part of the predictably better trained cadres acting as the structural backbone of MLN operations have been assassinated or detained.

This is what emerges from the information available and those are the facts on which the reactionary propaganda insists.

But, in addition, two results of a political nature can be deduced:

The potential that the MLN had developed has been unequivocally revealed, making clear an example of what can be done in this matter.

It has been demonstrated how a really important armed apparatus can be disarticulated, dismantled, and reduced, in relative terms, to a much lower level of operability and in a short period of time, if the criteria guiding its action is not adequate.

With these results obtained by repression, the reactionary propaganda aims to establish this political conclusion: “Armed struggle is not viable in Uruguay, and violence — as well as crime — does not pay” …On the other hand, the reformists chant: “Armed struggle not only does not lead to power, but is even counterproductive, compromises mass social insertion, and militants remain stuck in this framework.”

The selectivity of the repression that shakes up and strikes, occasionally at reformism, but in short, “condones” it, also tends to the following:

It spares punishment to those who move politically within the guidelines provided by the system.

Furthermore it leaves an exit open, a legalized and controllable escape for social tensions. By selectively striking the revolutionaries, reformism is politically benefited.

It is in this way that the repression seems to indicate that the class struggle must follow a process.

The ruling classes want to ensure that everyone plays by their game. An invented game and predesigned for them, a game where they cannot lose. That well-known game: legal parties, controlled propaganda, periodic elections … and back to start. In that game they have a card that “kills” all the others. It is repression. Politically speaking, the dictatorship. To convince everyone that it is so, that it is inevitably so, that their game is the natural thing, that it will always be like that, is the political task of repression.

Succeeding at making all the revolutionaries ask themselves: “If they did this so quickly with an organization like the MLN, what will they do with others?” To facilitate the reformists and capitulators of all kinds in the presumed confirmation of their counterrevolutionary thesis: “violence does not pay,” “the adventurists,” while suggesting to the hesitant, the path of “the good and the law.” Searching within the capitalist system for the way to make it less bad … saving the system as such. All this and much more is the “lesson” they want to be learned. Many doubt. At the level of public opinion it is almost inevitable that the great ebb of disillusionment will arise in the face of the alleged failure of the armed route, from which many expected a more or less immediate revolutionary outcome. Many are afraid and fear paralyzes them. Many will be “burned out” by the negative experience.

All of this happens every time the revolution suffers a defeat. And what seems to be the dismantling of the MLN apparatus is, let us say these words well thought out and with all clarity, a serious defeat for the Uruguayan revolution. It is an important lost battle. It is not, it cannot be nor will it be the end of the war. It is not, it cannot be, of course, the end of the class struggle either. It exists and will exist, under different forms, with different levels at each moment, in each stage, until the system collapses. This is how it will be, because that struggle arises from the capitalist system itself, from its own exploitative and oppressive essence. It is a product of its organization and function. As long as that system exists, there will inevitably be class struggle.

The defeat today is not the end of the armed struggle either. It exists and will continue to exist as a level of the class struggle, as long as the socio-economic and political process of our country continues to exist within the current terms. Because that level of armed struggle emerges as a need posed by the characteristics of the process of socio-economic and political deterioration, of which the ruling classes have neither found nor will find an outlet for. It is this deterioration without exit, which raises the need for a level of armed struggle, and as long as the process of deterioration continues, there will still be conditions for armed activity. There will always be organizations that assume that task for which the conditions have given.

The armed struggle will not end, in short, because there are organizations in a position to continue it. And it will continue.

What should not endure is the mistaken conception that has prevailed here up to now. What is in crisis, hopefully definitively, is the concept of “Foquismo.” The defeat that the Uruguayan revolution suffers under this orientation today is for us, revolutionaries, also our defeat.

The path of the revolution does not take place in a flowery meadow. It is difficult, tortuous and is paved with difficulties. Through it one advances and in it one learns and even falls. How often? How long? There is no crystal ball or magicians in these things that can predict the future. Here, you also make your way by walking. The march is long, we know. The only decisive thing is the willingness to move forward. Not to burn for good, for the sake of blind faith. But because the conditions in which the process unfolds make it essential and possible. We will only abandon the path of armed action if a very important change in that process would indicate to us that it is counterproductive for revolutionary ends.Nothing that indicates this change has occurred. On the contrary the process of deterioration is clearer and more serious than ever. Nothing indicates, therefore, that we have to change the strategy, and in that strategy, armed struggle occupies a fundamental place.

Armed activity has been oriented until now predominantly through the conception of Foquismo. With that conception, we have disagreed from the beginning, we saw and pointed out its weaknesses, we did our best because they were overcome, and we oriented our practice according to another line. Against all appearances, over our own inadequacies, our own mistakes, time and facts have proven us correct . We are not happy to confirm that. In the face of so many comrades of the MLN assassinated, brutally tortured, prisoners, with all that marvelous construction developed over the years, and through the effort of so many who struggled for the revolution and that today seems to be collapsing. We can not feel satisfaction for the facts that what we envisioned years ago being promptly fulfilled.. Those dead are our dead, those tortured are our tortured. As well as our comrades in our organization who today are now enduring the most brutal tortures and are paying with their lives defending the principles, life and line of our organization.

Far from us, then, to be smug. Much further, obviously is the despicable attitude of the reformists, opportunists and cowards, who spit now, ostentatiously, the counterrevolutionary hatred that they hid hypocritically when things were going better. The road is long, tortuous, and paved with difficulties. It is almost impossible not to stumble, nor even to fall. Especially in the complex conditions, so particular of Venezuela. [2] But from stumbles and falls, you have to learn. Yes, the march is long and difficult. That is why it would be unforgivable to stumble twice on the same stone. In order to not do so, to learn, we must analyze as objectively as possible what has happened in these hard months, and based on the conclusions of that analysis, we must be more precise about the technique, and expand upon it in more detailed terms.

Like any revolutionary victory, the triumph of the Cuban Revolution had a stimulating effect in Latin America, helping to advance the process of struggle throughout the continent. It demonstrated the viability of armed struggle, evidenced by the existence of conditions to initiate it. It showed that, indeed, in certain precise and concrete conditions, victory could be obtained in a relatively short time. That was the Cuban experience. We do not want to expand here on the vast and varied repercussions that the Cuban Revolution had. The revolutionaries learned many things from Cuba. As did the counterrevolution.

Today we refer only to a conception of the armed struggle, which was presented as based on the experience of Cuba.This concept known as “focus theory” or “Foquismo” systematized at the time by Régis Debray, especially in his work “Revolution in the Revolution?” pretended to be a conceptualization of the Cuban experience. He tried to specify in some quite precise strategic-tactical criteria, the lessons that, according to his supporters, could be drawn from the guerrilla war in Cuba. These strategic criteria were presented as generalizable, as applicable in most Latin American countries. Its influence was very great, motivating very intense polemics at the time, especially on the subject of its formulation by Debray.

In our country it was also polemicized in this regard, where the influence of these conceptions was strongly exerted. These conceptions were the ones that guided, basically, the practice of the MLN. Let us hasten to clarify that the line of the MLN was not, however, an application in lets say a classic, orthodox, foquista criteria. Throughout its years of activity and even from its beginnings, this movement introduced variants and corrected or adapted the foquista concepts. The strategic-tactical line of the MLN has not been a mechanical transfer of the first and original foquista line. These adaptations constitute what is original, what is the same, and what is specific to the urban guerrilla experience (the Tactical Combat Units), of which the MLN takes center stage in Uruguay. But nevertheless, in spite of the great and very valuable creative effort applied to the adaptation of Foquismo to local conditions, this effort did not alter the basic foquista assumptions which inform the practice of the MLN. This constitutes an undoubtedly original and specific variant of Foquismo. For this reason, given the great importance that movement’s activity has had in the process of the struggles in our country, it is useful before analyzing its performance, to make an evaluative balance of the criteria that constitute the foquista conception of armed struggle, such as they were formulated by their theorists, especially by Debray.

Our Organization disagreed with Foquismo since its emergence as a concept. We understand that the failures experienced today by the MLN and with it the Uruguayan revolution, correspond to the fact that the weaknesses of the foquista proposal was not overcome by the MLN in a timely manner. This largely occurred because their efforts pointed to an adaptation of Foquismo and not a break with it. This leads us in the first place to briefly express the characteristics that we understand to be the most salient of the foquista approach.

The need to initiate the armed struggle as soon as possible, provided there are certain economic and social conditions that make it viable. It was assumed that these conditions were met in almost all Latin American countries (Debray said that Uruguay and Chile were the exception, that in both countries these conditions did not exist), as a consequence of their underdevelopment and backwardness.

The political and even ideological conditions (called “subjective conditions”) would develop as a consequence of the activity of the armed “focus”(foco). From there, the existence or not of revolutionary political parties was considered as secondary and certainly not a priority. The sympathies aroused by the military activity of the foco should be framed in organizations whose function was, almost exclusively, to contribute to the effort and military victory. More than parties, properly speaking, what was sought were support organizations and support of the military effort, with tasks of coverage, [3] logistical support and propaganda, recruitment, etc., focused on the development of the operational potential of the armed foco and its expansion. The development of the struggle would be measured in terms of growth in operational capacity; success in terms of military success and the victory was the military victory in the war. The expectation and confidence in that victory, which would emerge from armed action, was the achievement and the essential requirement on the ideological plane.

The war would be conceived in terms of guerrilla warfare, centered on the rural environment, under the protection of suitable geographical conditions (mountains, jungles, etc.) that would make possible the concealment of the guerrillas and the tactics of “hitting and disappearing” by always moving, characteristic of the rural guerrilla. In its classic, original formulation, Foquismo denied the viability of the urban guerrilla. By definition “always in the presence of the enemy” always achievable by the latter, the urban guerrilla, it was said, was condemned to a rapid annihilation. The armed and urban activity would only fulfill a complementary function to the rural guerrilla, which would be the protagonist of the confrontation and who through many small and partial victories,would conquer the final victory by reducing the opposing army to impotence.

The military activity of the foco would inaugurate a process where each action, each operation of the foco would cause a generalized replication, a response of repression. To the extent that the guerrillas were operating with greater intensity, at higher levels, repression would harden and would be generalized. Insofar that the harsh generalizing repression affects an increasingly broad sector of the population, the greater the sympathies that the foco would arouse and the greater, therefore, its possibilities of development. In this ascending dialectic of action-repression, socio-politico conditions that are ever more favorable to military action would be generated, until culminating in an ideal situation in which important sectors of the population, supporting the guerrillas, their armed vanguard, would impose the fall of the despotic government,supported only by the privileged minority and the repressive apparatus, defeated in its efforts to militarily suppress the guerilla.

The generation of this dynamic — in short, the central core of Foquismo — would emanate from the armed successes.These would generate the prospect of victory capable of attracting the masses in the framework of increasing political repression. The activity of the guerrillas and the repressive response that it would inevitably produce, would close all the doors to the masses, all the ways that were not the route of armed struggle, necessarily turning the people to the side of the revolution. Thus a short, simple and direct path would proceed to the “politicization of the masses,” its nucleation [4] behind the armed guerrilla vanguard. From this point of view, the importance of all mass activity (trade union, propaganda, public politics) not directly aimed at favoring the war effort was underestimated. Mass activity supposedly distracts forces in aspects considered secondary or even negative, insofar as they could open expectations and perspectives that would compete, eventually, with the path of armed struggle. For the rest, it was based on the premise that every organization, every public activity, would be quickly swept away by repression once the action-repression mechanics triggered by the guerrilla foco has been set in motion.

The time that has elapsed, the intense, rich and often painful experiences produced from these years by the Latin American revolutionary movements have clarified the fatal errors of Foquismo.

The simplicity of its conception of the necessary conditions to start and especially to carry out the armed struggle.This subject, vast and of defining importance,obviously deserves a particularized consideration, which goes beyond the framework of this brief reference. It involves the analysis of the relationships between the conditions of the economic level, of the class struggle, and the political and ideological levels (subjective conditions of the same and the consideration of the role of armed activity in relation to them).Furthermore it delineates between the reformist currents, and leads necessarily, to elucidate theoretical points of view and to the critique of the social and ideological roots of the Foquista conception itself.

The development of political conditions, much less that of ideological conditions, do not derive from guerrilla activity in the rather mechanical terms foreseen by Foquismo. The activity of the armed foco has not been shown as an adequate substitute, not even as a possible and viable substitute for party activity. This insufficiency is plain to see as the struggle is prolonged. The political responses, both of the dominant classes as well as the dominated, do not conform to the overly schematic and rectilinear [5] forecasts of Foquismo. It is evident that an overly simplistic perspective of the structure and functioning of the political and ideological levels weighed on this conception, the importance of which was notoriously underestimated. On the other hand, the possibility of forcing a change of the political conditions, as well as the mentality and beliefs of the people through armed activity was notoriously overestimated. The delay in the advance of the so-called subjective conditions continued to weigh on their activity, frequently producing the isolation of the rural foco, and thus creating the conditions of its annihilation.

The rejection of the possibility for the urban guerrilla and the exclusivity reclaimed for the rural guerrilla is judged by the facts. There has been and there is extensive practice of urban armed struggle. However, it is conspicuous that the latter has been acquiring further development in Latin America and even worldwide.

The cumulative and ascending mechanics of action-repression, which would lead to a favorable polarization of forces, generalizing and isolating the repression, and developing and taking root in the foco, does not usually occur. Repression has learned to maintain its selectivity, the ruling classes can and do take countermeasures that hinders and reverses this dynamic. In its strategy, the counterrevolutionary activity of reformism and the handling of the old ideological myths of bourgeois liberalism (elections, legality, etc.) have played an important role that Foquismo did not foresee.

Most of the failures experienced in the years after the triumph of the Cuban Revolution can be attributed to the influence of Foquismo. It was not the armed struggle that failed, what clearly failed was the short-sighted expectations that Foquismo entails. In the midst of these failures, it is undeniable — nevertheless — that the widespread practice of armed struggle decisively contributed to modifying the patterns and characteristics of political action in Latin America.

Armed practice radically modified the way of perceiving and facing the problems of the revolution. It caused the reconsideration of it in concrete and precise terms.It brought to the table with pressing reality and urgency, the issues related to concrete ways to achieve with violence, the destruction of bourgeois power. Since then there has been an unavoidable problem regarding which methods to employ, in order to develop the armed route to the revolution. The problem of revolutionary military strategy. All this entailed a revaluation of the utilization, at all levels, of revolutionary violence.

For several decades, the revolution has been repeatedly talked about in these countries. But for a long time, little was concretely done for it. Nothing was raised regarding the concrete ways in which the revolutionary process would take shape. In general, the void without a foreseeable solution that this problem left, was filled with the myth of the so-called “proletarian insurrection,” conceived in terms of a generalized popular uprising, with people leaving en masse to the streets, barricades, etc. This myth was inherited from the last century, the Paris Commune of 1871, the Soviet October, or the Catalan July 18 th , concretizing it with realities and helping to keep it alive in the imagination of the people.

It is not that insurrections of this type cannot be carried out. Nor are they, under any conditions, impossible. The “Cordobazo” of May 69’ and similar uprisings in Rosario, Tucumán, and other cities, sufficiently show and with very close examples, that the era of widespread, popular street insurrections are far from over. The problem is that the insurrection becomes a myth, a comfortable myth, opportunistically manageable, if it is isolated from concrete, habitual, and daily political practice. And that is what reformism has been doing for many years. That is what the social democracy of the old socialist parties did first and ended up by expressly renouncing violence, insurrection, and revolution.This is what the neo-socialists of the communist parties did and continue to do, who still talk about revolution while doing everything possible to prevent it from coming.

Reformism places the insurrection in the sky of unattainable ideals. By verbally exalting it, they try — in fact — to prevent it from being prepared. In this disagreement, in that incoherence between their counterrevolutionary political practice and their verbalism about a final insurrectionary outcome, they seek to base their eternal affirmation that “conditions are lacking,” whenever there is an attempt to advance the process of political struggle, applying means not included in their very limited recipebook.This is basically limited to two things: a) at the economic level of the class struggle, wage action, developed with the utmost respect for bourgeois and therefore peaceful “legality”; b) at the political level, parliamentarism, electoralism, as a way to capitalize politically on the results of the economic struggle. By confining its practice at all levels within the increasingly narrow frameworks of bourgeois legality, reformism creates the conditions for its ever greater integration into the system. It obstructs and tries to prevent the development of the conditions for its destruction.

It is obvious that if the design and the revolutionary project are not present guiding the daily practice of the struggle at all levels, the conditions for a revolutionary outcome will never be rendered.The capitalist system will not be destroyed following the rules of the game that they generated themselves to guarantee its continuity. The continuity of the system is maintained by reducing action to only that which bourgeois legality allows, only what the legality created and managed by the bourgeoisie recommends. That is why only ever greater reformism can emerge from the reformist line and an ever greater retreat from the famous insurrectionary outcome that they postpone until an indefinable “opportune moment.”That is why they can not formulate, nor do they want to, any strategic-military guideline.

By turning the idea of ​​the “proletarian insurrection” into a myth, the reformists make it into a legitimating pretext for their counterrevolutionary practice, so useful to the system. Far from representing an alternative opposed to it, aimed at destroying it, it becomes daily practice, in concrete and everyday events and in a way “perfects” it, by correcting it in its most extreme and visible manifestations of injustice.

It is important to insist on this, because the myth of an incomprehensible future insurrection, suddenly and miraculously arisen, without anyone preparing it, as the paradoxical end of an ultralegalist practice, is the counterpart of another rooted myth: of the invincibility of repression. “The revolution will be possible when there are conditions” say the communist parties and with them all the reformists add “the day of the revolution will arrive.” “But those who violate the laws before that day, wielding weapons, will be fatally defeated,” they say. And from there they always condemn those as “putchists,” “adventurers,”and “free-loaders” who do not resign themselves to transit through the electoral impasse,waiting for that hypothetical day when the revolution miraculously descends from the idealistic sky in which it is confined by the cheap chatter of the capitulators.

This absurd conception, disguised with pseudo-scientific phraseologies, was for a long time the predominant one on the left. Faced with each failure, faced with each defeat of the revolution,they are once again rehabilitating it as an inviolable dogma. Faced with each triumph of the revolution they are adopting it and inventing pseudo-demonstrations attempting to show that in reality, the revolution advances when applying the doctrines …of the reformists.

But despite their inexhaustible “polemical” resources, the reformists can not and will not destroy the facts. And it is in the terrain of facts that the viability of armed struggle has been demonstrated and already definitively incorporated into the political strategy of the revolutionary organizations.

The prevailing problem concerns the precise characteristics that this strategy must cover in each social, national or regional formation.

A polemic concerning the adoption of the urban or rural guerrilla as exclusive or excluding forms is not what is being offered.The core of the useful analysis which can be made regarding the experience of past or current armed struggle does not lie there. Rather, the central theme is the analysis of the foquista conception, which in its primary and orthodox formulation held up the rural guerrilla as a priority and exclusive form, but which later was also adapted to urban guerrilla forms . It is this foquista conception, in all its variants that is in crisis and not armed struggle, which maintains its validity. We conceive of armed struggle as a fundamental aspect of the political practice of a clandestine party that also acts at a mass level, based on a harmonious and global strategy. It is this correct conception of the struggle,which is reaffirmed by the collected experience.

The development of the struggle in recent years has totally changed the terms by which the struggle in Latin America traditionally arose. It meant overcoming, surely definitively, a long stage in which that struggle had been conceived according to two patterns:

At the economic level of the class struggle: mass activity, trade union, with vindicating content, primarily concerning wages and processed via traditional methods (stoppages, strikes, events, etc.) practiced within the framework of bourgeois legality.

at the political level of the class struggle: activity of legal parties with their traditional methods (public venues, events, propaganda, publications, ideological diffusion, etc.) aimed decisively at obtaining electoral results.

The way to reach power (falsely identified with the government) was the vote. Obtaining increasingly numerous parliamentary representation signified stages towards that outcome. Violence at both the economic and political levels of the class struggle, they said, was negative since it implied putting up obstacles, “pretextual” obstacles to the electoral path.Conceived as the only possible path to reach “power” and this being the cardinal problem of political practice, everything had to contribute to keeping this path open. In other words: if it is politically decisive to obtain power by the electoral route and the elections meant something “legal,” you had to be within the law to be able to vote … and thus be able to come to power.

This has been and is the core of the reformist, electoralist political approach. Based on that approach all violence should be rejected because it endangers the elections, and therefore, the possibility of coming to power. This “argumentation” is complemented by identifying legalism with the possibility of carrying out any type of mass activity. Even at the union level, “contact with the masses” can only be maintained by acting “legally.” Violence only gives “pretexts” for repression, repression that fatally “isolates,” and thus part of the reasoning that reformists make. At the level of the economic struggle, violence acts as a “pretext” for repression, isolates and harms mass activity and is even offered as a pretext for the reaction to hinder the only way — necessarily electoral and therefore necessarily legal — to reach power. It would then be “infantilism” and “spontaneity” and the reformists prey on the errors of anarcho-syndicalism, accusing it of subordinating, effectively, the political level to the economic level of the class struggle; by not proposing a clear solution to the problem of the destruction of bourgeois power, it offers too easy of “a gift” for criticism by the reformists.

For years on our part — we have repeated it for the doubters — we maintain that the objective of violence at the level of the economic struggle, IS NOT ONLY and NOT even principally the obtaining of economic demands in themselves. Rather, the violence in the economic struggle has as a function to contribute — let it be clearly understood, TO CONTRIBUTE — to raising the level of those struggles to a political level. To contribute (together with the other means: propaganda, ideological struggle, public and legal struggle or not) to elevate the economic struggle, as much as possible, to the level of political struggle. To contribute toward raising the union awareness of economic interest that animates the economic struggle. To contribute, as we say, to elevating it to political consciousness, of political interest, which is the consciousness necessary to destroy bourgeois political power — the bourgeois state — the ultimate objective of all revolutionary political practice.

Destruction of the capitalist state, destruction of bourgeois power, that is necessarily violent and cannot be achieved by (assuming that it can be …) traversing through elections to occupy certain official positions (in the Chambers or even of the Presidency), as those are only some elements and not even the most important ones, through which bourgeois power operates.And as it is impossible and has never been seen, nor can anyone sensibly claim that the capitalist state is “extinguished” to make way for socialism, nor that the bourgeoisie will “peacefully” donate its properties to the people, or will peacefully renounce its domination and its power, they must be destroyed by force.

Only those with bourgeois shamelessness, knowingly lying, speak of capitalism as having changed in its essence. That it is now “capitalism of the people” as the Yankee and Korean ideologues say here, with Rafael Caldera repeating them. Only the wise guys — or simpleton — reformists believe that they will change it, little by little, with “wise” parliamentary laws. Or that there may be a “good” capitalism, led by a “national bourgeoisie,” which some people invent whenever things get half ugly …

The affirmation of that necessity for revolutionary violence, the necessity for revolution, and the theoretical-practical overcoming of petty-bourgeois reformism (nationalist or democratic, “populist,” as they say) or worker (social-democratic, Trotskyist, or communist , “Marxist,” as they say) has been the fundamental contribution that the armed organizations of Latin America have made to the ascending process of the struggles of our peoples.

An organization is only truly revolutionary if the problem of power is really posed and resolved and the problem of power is solved only with an adequate line on the practice of violence, that is, with an adequate military line. The demonstration of which is that there will only be socialism with revolution, that is with the violent destruction of the bourgeois state. That there will only be violent destruction of the state, of bourgeois power, with an adequate political-military practice, are all contributions made in these years by the armed organizations of the continent. In other words,no organization is truly revolutionary until it addresses and solves the problems of the violent, military aspect of its political practice.

There is no revolutionary politics without revolutionary theory. There is no revolutionary politics without a revolutionary military line. All of this has become clear and clarifying this has been an invaluable contribution. It has advanced the class struggle at all levels.

But reality is dialectical. When certain findings have been made, new problems arise from these findings. When you have reached a higher,more elevated level of comprehension, practice, and experience (and understanding — except for coffee house charlatans — always indicates experience and practice) new problems, also at a higher, finer level , they require our attention and must be resolved.

Our country has not been, as some predicted, an exception in the process of advancing the Latin American revolution.Here we have also largely lived those experiences. Here there has been and continues to be a vast and prolific political-military practice. To analyze it, delve into its content, and really understand the causes and the meaning of its advances and setbacks, is a decisive task of today that we can not escape.

The practice of urban guerrilla warfare in our country by the UTC of the MLN meant, from the beginning, the introduction of variants in the schema of orthodox Foquismo. The most obvious being: the urban character of the guerrilla, which at the time many had denied as viable.

The problem of the characteristics that, in conditions of urban guerrilla warfare, includes the link between the guerrillas and the masses as well as the policy to be developed in relation to this.In other words, the problem of the concrete modalities according to which, when the guerrillas act in an urban environment, they politically capitalize on the popular sympathy that can promote their action;

The nature of the process by which military destruction of the repressive apparatus will occur through urban guerrilla practice, a prerequisite for the destruction of bourgeois power.

The mere formulation of these two questions clearly leads us to ask two preceding questions, because the answers that are offered will depend on the type of solution we give to the two problems raised above.

The two questions are: (1 st ) What is the guerrilla for, what are its objectives, its program? (2 nd ) When does the guerrilla struggle begin and when does it end?

(1 st ) What is the guerrilla for, what are its objectives, its program? There have been guerrillas whose objective was only the conquest of national independence. Putting it into class terms, this independence means substituting direct political domination by the imperialist metropolitan bourgeoisie, exercised through the bourgeois, metropolitan state apparatus, substituting it, we say, for the domination exercised by the local bourgeoisie, through a local, “national” bourgeois state apparatus.The national bourgeoisies in the current, imperialist stage of capitalism are-we know-dependent bourgeoisies and the states they create are only half sovereign.

We do not want to downplay the importance of these processes of struggle for political independence, nor deny the possibilities of revolutionary action that they can enable at certain junctures. We simply want to pick apart, from a class point of view, the essence of an issue around which there is more hubbub and confusion.
