---
title: "Carlo Tresca & the First Antifa"
author: "Jeff Stein"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-stein-carlo-tresca-the-first-antifa"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Book review"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jeff-stein-carlo-tresca-the-first-antifa.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-stein-carlo-tresca-the-first-antifa.epub"
    hosted: false
---

a review of Nunzio Pernicone, Carlo Tresca: Portrait of a Rebel . AK Press, 2010. 380 pages, $19.95, paper. Carlo Tresca is well known in the U.S. as one of the early leaders of the IWW. Born in Italy in 1879, Tresca was forced to migrate to the United States in 1904, due to his socialist and labor activism. After emigrating, Tresca quickly became disillusioned with American “democracy” and the class collaboration of the electoral socialists and the business unionism of the American Federation of Labor. Drawing upon his speech-making skills and journalistic talents, Tresca organized for the Industrial Workers of the World, the United Mine Workers of America, the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union and the Progressive Mine Workers, and helped lead strikes by Italian immigrants working in textile mills in New England and the coal mines of Pennsylvania. Tresca never formally joined the IWW, but worked more as a freelance troubleshooter, often called in by local strike committees instead of by IWW General Headquarters. His formal association, as such, was with the FSI, the Italian Socialist Federation, the syndicalist-oriented wing of the socialists in Italy and Italian socialists in America. Carlo Tresca was involved with a number of important strikes by the IWW, including the Lawrence and Paterson textile strikes, and the Mesabi Range iron ore strike. It was during the Mesabi Range strike that Tresca fell out of favor with Bill Haywood and the IWW. Haywood decided that the strike was lost and wanted to end it, but Tresca and his companion, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, felt the IWW should continue to support the strikers as long as they were trying to hold out. The strike ended, but Haywood did not trust Tresca or Flynn after that, even going so far as to hold them responsible for a group of strikers pleading guilty to manslaughter for the death of a violent sheriff’s deputy. When the First World War began and President Wilson began his persecution of the IWW (seeing it as an opportunity to rid the American labor movement of radicals), Tresca and Flynn also disagreed with Haywood that IWW leaders should surrender themselves to authorities. Haywood was under the misguided belief that the courts would find them within their rights and let them go. Hundreds of IWW organizers went to prison. Bill Haywood fled to Russia. Tresca and Flynn were vindicated in their decision not to turn themselves in and managed to stay out of prison. After the war, Democrat Wilson and his Republican successors launched a Red Scare. Immigrant radicals were deported, regardless of how long they had lived in the United States. Russian Jews and Italians were persecuted, in particular. Carlo Tresca narrowly escaped many attempts to deport him, because the Bureau of Investigation (later FBI) could not prove Tresca was not an American citizen, or that he ever advocated the violent overthrow of the government. Tresca’s days as a strike leader, however, were over. The IWW was in turmoil, due to the repression, and AFL leaders considered Tresca a pariah. To invite Tresca to be involved in strikes was considered a surefire way to increase resistance by employers and repression by the police. Tresca returned to radical journalism, not only as a means to support himself and his children, but to continue to agitate against capitalism, the church, and the Italian monarchy, as well as the rise of fascism. Tresca purchased the Italian-language newspaper Il Martello (The Hammer) in 1917. Tresca used Il Martello to organize opposition to Mussolini and the Italian fascists, and their supporters in the United States. Tresca had met Mussolini when they were both socialist exiles in Switzerland in 1904, prior to Tresca going to the United States. Mussolini told Tresca that he was “not revolutionary enough.” Tresca thought Mussolini was a narcissistic faker. During the war, Mussolini proved Tresca right and “Il Duce” supported Italy’s entry on the side of Britain and France, and embr…
