---
title: "Crime, Criminals, Punishment an anarchist view"
author: "Workers Solidarity Movement"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/workers-solidarity-movement-crime-criminals-punishment-an-anarchist-view"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Housebreaking...joy riding ... heroin pushing ... mugging ... rape"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "workers-solidarity-movement-crime-criminals-punishment-an-anarchist-view.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/workers-solidarity-movement-crime-criminals-punishment-an-anarchist-view.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Daylight Robbery        Robin Hoods?        Heroin Pushers        Democracy?        Rape and Child abuse        An Aberration?        Domination        Punishment: who watches the watchers?        Anarchist Police? AROUND THIS TIME every year we are hit with a barrage of articles and TV programmes about spiralling crime figures. The usual rash of calls for stiffer sentences and more cops on the beat are thrown out as the answer. Anarchists have a convincing analysis of crime and some ideas on how to eliminate it for good. Conor McLoughlin looks at the issues . The Russian anarchist Kropotkin in his examination of the subject came up with three types of crime. Property related crime, government related crime and crimes against the person. In Britain it has been estimated (Anarchist Black Cross bulletin) that 94% of crime is committed against property (though admittedly a lot of it would be personal property). However what isn’t recorded are those crimes committed for property. This isn’t just playing with words. We live in a capitalist system. But where did all the capital come from in the first place? Check your history books. The capitalism of the 18 th and 19 th century was built on the piracy and slavery of the 16 th and 17 th . Millions of pounds of gold, silver and spices plundered from the “New World” financed the basis of the banking and trade system. One of the first commodities to be traded was human beings. Slavery played a vital in the early years of capitalism. Many English titled families of today owe their knighthoods and dukedoms to this sordid trade. The day-to-day running of the system is daylight robbery. A worker’s wages only represent a fraction of the value of his/her labour. The rest flows into the boss’s pocket. This was what Proudhon meant by the oft quoted “property is theft”. It would have been clearer (though not as catchy!) if he had qualified this remark. All property and wealth that enables you to exploit the labour of others is theft. If we got paid what we were really worth the present system couldn’t function. This is the main and fundamental reason for all the cops and courts, to defend the system which ensures we slave our lives away so that the rich can get richer. There is also the whole range of officially criminal fraudulent activities. These range from ‘insider trading’ to criminal empires like the Mafia. Only a tiny fraction of these ever come to light. The law is built to serve the bosses not to expose them. The Telecom scandal shows how £3 million can be made in a few weeks by sitting on the boards of several companies and playing pass the parcel. The Beef Tribunal was, until neutralised by the recent Supreme Court decision on cabinet confidentiality, finding out how a fortune could be made in export credit insurance by small donations to the right political parties. If anyone of these businessmen are caught they risk a few days in an open prison or have their sentences suspended. Those that are nabbed are just the fall guys. The system is riddled with fraud and rackets. It is a racket. The solution to these crimes is simple. Shut the system down. It simply can’t cure or reform itself. On the other hand there are crimes against property. Living on the dole or miserable wages leads some people into a range of dodges like not paying for cable TV, working in the “black economy” or shop-lifting to feed a family or a heroin habit. A small minority may even turn to burglary, drug dealing and other organised anti-social crime. This is certainly no justification for anti-social crime like burglary, heroin-pushing and ‘joy-riding’. We understand why they happen but we do not condone or excuse them. Working class communities are especially vulnerable to this type of crime. Old people and parents of young children may live in constant fear because of it. Those who make a living preying on their own class are as bad if not worse then the capitalists. There aren’t many Robin Hoods out there…
