---
title: "The Failure of Dual Sovereignty"
author: "Kevin Carson"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-the-failure-of-dual-sovereignty"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The British Empire and the United States"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-carson-the-failure-of-dual-sovereignty.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-the-failure-of-dual-sovereignty.epub"
    hosted: false
---

SUMMARY: In the dominant school of American constitutional history, the issues of the Revolution are usually described along these lines: The traditional Whig idea of sovereignty described it as the supreme, uncontrollable power of legislation in a state. Sovereignty was indivisable; should there be two independent legislatures in a single state, per impossibile the result would be a solecism in theory as in practice, an imperium in imperio. The British empire, however, presented a novel form of federal state to which the traditional Whig notions of sovereignty were irrelevant. To apply the doctrine of indivisible sovereignty to the constitution of the empire was akin to putting new wine in old bottles. What was needed instead was a new theory of divided sovereignty, in which power was divided between Parliament and the colonial legislatures, each supreme and independent within its own sphere of activity. From the 1760s on, colonial pamphleteers, most notably Dickinson and Dulany, atempted to formulate such a theory and to make a clear line of demarcation between the powers of Parliament and the other legislatures. In the face of reality, however, the advocates of absolute Parliamentary sovereignty continued to insist on their fossilized ideology. Either Parliament was the supreme and unlimited sovereign legislature of the empire, they argued, or the colonies were entirely independent of its authority. No middle ground was logically defensible. In the face of this polemical onslaught, the Americans increasingly accepted the alternatives as defined by Parliament’s advocates, and from about 1770 onward, they denied Parliamentary authority over the colonies altogether. Their model of the empire was a collection of mutually independent realms, each with its own supreme legislature, united only by a common crown. Thus, Parliament’s rigid insistence on an outmoded doctrine of sovereignty escalated the conflict, and forced a mutual hardening of positions, until any realistic compromise was unacceptable to both sides. The old Empire collapsed as a result of the dogmatic refusal of the contending parties to divide sovereignty between the component parts of a federal state. Although the voices of reason became increasingly irrelevant to the struggle with Great Britain, they were vindicated by, and in some way served as a precedent for, the later system of dual sovereignty under the U.S. Constitution. This, put as briefly as the nature of the subject allows, is the dominant constitutional view of the Revolution. Besides this basic outline portrayal of the facts, the adherents of this view carry some weighty emotional bagage in which, to borrow Richard Weaver’s expression, the god-terms are pragmatism and realism, and the devil-terms are legalism, pedantry, and logic. The central purpose of this article is to demonstrate, in the face of the dominant view: 1) that the traditional notion of indivisible sovereignty is valid; 2) that the attempts by Dickinson and others to divide sovereignty were not only logically untenable, but as a result were failures in practice; 3) that British polemicists were quite correct in denying any viable middle ground between the supremacy of Parliament and the independence of the colonies; 4) that the independence of the colonies as sovereign realms was quite consistent with the practical operation of the empire; and 5) that Dickinson’s doctrine of divided sovereignty, far from serving as a prototype of the present federal system, was equally inadequate to explain either the federal organization of the Constitution or that of the Empire. I will also attempt, in passing, to restore the honor of logic by demonstrating, against the spirit of the age, that things logically self-contradictory are also failures in the “real world,” and to uphold “legalism” in the sense of a normative standard of legality, as opposed to a codification of the de facto balance of power. To accomplish this, I will take Andrew C. McLaugh…
