---
title: "Eco-Utopia from Below"
author: "Dan Fischer"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dan-fischer-eco-utopia-from-below"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on May 30, 2023 from anarchistnews.org/content/eco-utopia-below"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "dan-fischer-eco-utopia-from-below.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dan-fischer-eco-utopia-from-below.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Solutions Abound        From Nowhere to Everywhere        Question of the State        Liberatory Pathways The Solutions Are Already Here: Ecological Revolt from Below By: Peter Gelderloos London: Pluto Press, 2022 Half-Earth Socialism: A Plan to Save the Future from Extinction, Climate Change and Pandemics By: Troy Vettese and Drew Pendergrass London: Verso Books, 2022 At a time when much climate literature emphasizes inadequate “deals” with capitalism or catastrophe-prone nuclear and geoengineering technologies, it’s refreshing to read two uncompromising proposals for ecological revolution. Despite coming from different political traditions, anarchist and Marxist, they reach overlapping conclusions regarding the necessity to reject elites’ false solutions, reduce global production, support participatory planning, and establish healthier relations with nonhuman beings. With solutions at hand, and the dead-ends increasingly obvious, the ways forward appear to be getting clearer. First, Peter Gelderloos’s The Solutions Are Already Here: Ecological Revolt from Below , is a cartography of movements resisting extraction, growing local food, and restoring ecosystems. Compared to the ecocidal ruling class and its spurious opposition among the mainstream left, autonomous uprisings can be remarkably effective using a minimum of resources. Based on extensive research and interviews, Gelderloos demonstrates that this web of struggle “represents the best hope for our planet” (146), should it further scale up and coordinate efforts. He discusses, for example, Mexico’s town of Cherán where P’u erépecha residents militantly rose up in 2011 and kicked out loggers, drug cartels, police, and politicians. Ever since, they have self-governed using horizontal methods of popular assembly and communal mediation (127). Volunteer patrols, accountable to popular councils, confiscate chainsaws from unauthorized loggers and monitor that farmers follow the ban on growing water-intensive avocado trees for commercial purposes. The town has implemented one of Mexico’s most advanced recycling programs, and with help from an impressive tree nursery, they’ve reforested over half of the previously deforested area. [1] Gelderloos discusses how various communities grow their own food. We read of Brazil’s Teia dos Povos network which has reclaimed large territories and grown enough food to live on. Its farmers are generally either practicing or transitioning to agroecology (110). Also in Brazil, Tupi-Guaraní communities, with support from anarchists in Cultive Resistência, are recovering and restoring land that’s been damaged by mining. They meet daily needs with their own harvests, including sweet potatoes, cassava, and fruit (116). The Solutions Are Already Here describes sizable urban farming and gardening projects established by horizontally run communes, including the Canary Islands’ La Esperanza , South Africa’s Abahlali baseMjondolo , and Mississippi’s Cooperation Jackson (134, 141, 144). Like the radical ecological movement itself, the book’s strongest suit regards blockades of extractive projects. Gelderloos interviews an anarchist involved in the Dayak tribes’ struggles against oil palm plantations. Blocking roads and seizing heavy equipment, the Dayak have halted land clearing, at least for now, in the Lamandau Regency, on the island of Kalimantan (Borneo), Indonesia (91). When covering more well-known blockades, such as France’s ZAD, Gelderloos criticizes how reformist elements defanged the movement shortly after it successfully stopped a planned airport (93–102). Had it been a longer book, Solutions likely would have discussed other contemporary eco-societies, such as Sri Lanka’s Sarvodaya Shramadana Movement , Mexico’s Zapatistas, Syria’s Democratic Confederalists, and Brazil’s Landless Workers Movement, in addition to countless other localities maintaining Indigenous and traditional practices of sustainability. It also might have argued for t…
