---
title: "The Bare Minimum"
author: "Timber"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/timber-the-bare-minimum"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "PAUSE — an IT security guide"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "timber-the-bare-minimum.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/timber-the-bare-minimum.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        P : Use a password manager        A : Use an ad blocker        U : Regularly install updates        S : Use Signal          Why Signal?          Understanding Phishing        E : Encrypt your data          On your phone          On your computer        Final thoughts There are a lot of IT security guides out there. However, almost all of them have one thing in common: They’re incredibly outdated. This is because the world of computers and phones, and thus of IT security, is evolving so quickly, that basically as soon as an IT security guide is released, it’s already out of date. However, I believe there’s some common ground, the bare minimum that’s recommended that doesn’t change quickly. This is not enough for everyone and depending on the threats your facing, you should definitely do further research. But I believe that everyone should implement the following five recommendations – and convince friends and family to do the same. To aid your memory, I arranged the recommendations to build the acronym PAUSE (use a P assword manager, use an A d blocker, regularly install U pdates, use S ignal and E ncrypt your data). You really should PAUSE everything you’re doing (especially with computers / phones) and implement those five recommendations first. Who am I to talk about this? Good question and please, don’t blindly trust me. Use your head to check if the recommendations make sense and do further research if you’re unsure. Good places are for example esc-it or EFF . Such places are also the sources for my knowledge on the topic, in addition to my experience working as a software engineer and my own tinkering. Some things in this guide are simplified, but I always attempt to simplify without decreasing the security. Everyone knows they should use secure passwords (and different ones for each account), but most people don’t use secure passwords anyways. Be it because it’s hard to remember different randomly generated passwords for each services or because it’s annoying to enter them manually. Both problems get solved with a password manager: You only have to remember one password (in addition perhaps to your encryption password ) which unlocks your password database, containing all your other passwords. It’s a bit of work changing the passwords on all your accounts to an automatically generated one that’s stored in your password manager, but once you did the work you’ll never want to go back. It’s more convenient and way more secure. There’s different options for password managers, the most notable ones being KeePass and bitwarden . KeePass doesn’t automatically synchronise the database between different devices, so while it’s open source and a bit safer than Bitwarden, Bitwarden is definitely the more convenient option. Both can be used for free. For KeePass I recommend KeePassXC on your computer and KeePassDX on your phone. You can synchronise the database for example with Syncthing , but that’s a bit more advanced and not the bare minimum anymore. Bitwarden also has apps and browser plugins and should be quite intuitive to set up. Using an ad blocker is not only a way to get rid of annoying ads, it also increases your security and privacy in the internet. Security because some ads are malicious and privacy because some ads track you. Whilst the increase of security is not huge (not only ads can serve malicious content), I definitely find it worth it because it also increases the usability of the internet significantly. On your computer you can install the extension uBlock Origin . It’s available both for Firefox and Chrome and blocks ads and trackers very reliably. On your phone you can either also install uBlock Origin (if you use Firefox mobile), or set up a specific DNS server. This sounds scarier than it is and also blocks most ads and trackers. You can change the DNS server in your phone settings to block ads in all apps. There’s various options for ad blocking DNS servers, I like DNS Forge . For…
