---
title: "Forming An Antifa Group"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/forming-an-antifa-group"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An alternative version can be read here: https://itsgoingdown.org/forming-an-antifa-group-a-manual/ Retrieved on 2020-09-08 from https://itsgoingdown.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/howtoantifa-revised.pdf"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "forming-an-antifa-group.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/forming-an-antifa-group.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        0)        1) Why “Antifa”?        2) Disadvantages        3) Obligations        4) Visibilty        5) Online Presence        6) Self-Defense        7) Guns        8) Manipulators, Big Mouths, Loose Cannons, and Provocateurs        9) Infiltrators        10) State Repression        11) Political Orientation        12) Take Action!        13) Security Culture & Internet Safety        Further Readings Anti-fascist groups, often called “antifa,” are popping up all around the United States, and a number of people have asked us for advice on forming a group. Because antifa work is different from other forms of radical organizing, and because the antifa groups themselves are changing, we have written down some of our suggestions, based on years of experience. However, this article has been written in a very fluid political situation, and some of these specifics may or may not be relevant in the coming months and years. This essay covers a number of points, including: the advantages, disadvantages, and obligations of working under the antifascist banner; questions involving anonymity and visibility, both in person and online; self-defense and firearms; working with problematic people and dealing with infiltrators; state repression; and actions to take as antifascists. Anti-fascist groups, often called “antifa,” are popping up all around the United States, and a number of people have asked a us for advice on forming a group. Because antifa work is different from other forms of radical organizing, and because the antifa groups themselves are changing, we have written down some of our suggestions, based on years of experience. However, this article has been written in a very fluid political situation (February 2017), and some of these specifics may or may not be relevant in the coming months and years. This essay covers a number of points, including: the advantages, disadvantages, and obligations of working under the anti-fascist banner; questions involving anonymity and visibility, both in person and online; self-defense and firearms; working with problematic people and dealing with infiltrators; state repression; and actions to take as anti-fascists. The first question is: Why are you forming an “antifa” group? The label has advantages and disadvantages, and you should consider this before adopting it. The antifa name gets you a certain level of brand recognition and built-in credibility, but it also includes certain obligations and distinct disadvantages. If the purpose of your group is to do public organizing where your members are clearly identifiable—organizing anti-Trump rallies or supporting refugees and immigrants—using the antifa label and the traditional antifa symbols will likely lead to blowback that could be avoided by naming your organization differently. “Las Cruces United Against Racism” will not draw the attention that calling yourself “La Cruces Antifa,” and using traditional antifa symbolism, will. The primary disadvantage is that fascists will try to identify members of your group and cause you physical harm. Staying as anonymous as possible is the easiest way to minimize this. Members’ pictures may appear on white power websites with any personal information they can find, and many anti-fascists have been injured, even killed, doing this work. If you are exposed, you will also be remembered by fascists for several years. (Keep in mind that anti-fascists who are notwhite men have been targeted more heavily by fascists: women garner greater online harassment, and people of color have been singled out in fights.) If you form a local antifa group, you will be expected to do a few things: Track white nationalist, Far Right, and fascist activity Your group will be expected to document fascist groups and organizing in your area. This means gathering information on who is doing what, and knowing the makeup and key players of the various groups that are active. Once information is verified, antifa…
