---
title: "Class & Race"
author: "Northeastern Federation of Anarcho-Communists"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fruttidurruti-underpaid-and-angry-nefac-philadelphia-class-race"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Burning Questions, Unpopular Answers"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "fruttidurruti-underpaid-and-angry-nefac-philadelphia-class-race.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fruttidurruti-underpaid-and-angry-nefac-philadelphia-class-race.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       EXCUSE THE CLASSISM        A CHALLENGE TO FELLOW ‘ANARCHISTS OF COLOR’        ANTI-RACIST STRUGGLE THROUGH COLLECTIVE RACIAL IDENTITY?        WHERE ARE WE GOING? Do class and race oppressions exist parallel to each other and as dominating forces exclusive of each other? Is one oppression more important to take on and resist than the other? Is it possible for either to effectively “trump” another? Or are these forces inextricably linked and intertwined? Do we perceive them to even be equal forms of domination — dual forces that compliment each other in order to maintain rule by any given regime to be met with the same resistance...and not as one that excuses the other? I’d like to argue that racism is an excuse. It’s an abstract form of perception that is used as a tool. I’d like to argue that classism can be a way of thinking as well, but class is by all means a concrete action in itself. To hold onto class rule, the ruling class must maintain its own power. The fact that a ruling class “is” is directly related to what it does, whereas there can be a ruling class completely made up of one race, but the fact that the race exists at all, isn’t inextricably linked to what that race does. The job of any ruling class is to maintain its own privilege by actively and systematically controlling how production and consumption is maintained and distributed. The capitalist ruling class does this because they’re in the business of being rich, not racist. White supremacy is a specific kind of racism that is directly related (but not exclusively) to how the U.S. ruling class divides the working class though forms of domestic policies. It definitely is central to how U.S. capital functions currently, and is a direct result of the factors that went into how European colonizers invaded the land that is now the U.S. Throughout the history of the United States, racism has been used as a social, cultural, political weapon to excuse atrocities committed through acts of genocide and slavery. The struggles of the people whose race has defined their class because of colonial domination in the U.S. helped shape the attitudes of racial separation within the working class as a whole. I would argue that since the civil rights movements of the 1960’s certain races such as African-Americans have become unraveled in their exclusive ties to their class. Since that era, there has been an emerging African-American middle class in the U.S. Although they hardly constitute a majority of the race, this growing class is a reflection of how U.S. white supremacy can and will change like a chameleon in order to meet the reshaping race and class struggles and movements for change. Another historical situation I’d like to point out is how white supremacy in the U.S. has adapted around the turn of the 20 th century to account for immigration from southern and eastern European countries. Poles, Hungarians, Bohemians and other unwanted peoples were NOT considered “white” when they arrived to work poor shit jobs in the States. Before them, Irish immigrants held onto class privilege on par with African-Americans at the time. Over time the U.S. ruling class saw the potential in “Americanizing” them, in other words, teaching them English, giving them educational classes, and investing in their communities in order to prop up their racial status to “white.” What this really meant was that the ruling class was creating the illusion that these new immigrants’ nationalities were of no use anymore, and in fact they had, as a people, more in common with the current Western-European settlers in their class, then they did with the African, Chinese, and Indigenous peoples of their class. This is an example of class domination reshaping its racial policies and attitudes domestically to fit in with their strategy of class domination. Finally, I’d like to take a look at other colonized lands that fell victim to European invasion, such as the lands that are now considered Mexico. Th…
