---
title: "Beyond Hope"
author: "Adam Greenfield"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/adam-greenfield-beyond-hope"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on January 7, 2025 from https://illwill.com/beyond-hope"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "adam-greenfield-beyond-hope.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/adam-greenfield-beyond-hope.epub"
    hosted: false
---

As the real impacts of climate change wreak ever greater havoc on our lives, it is increasingly clear that “climate change” has also become an ideological apparatus meant to entrap us in despair, policy paralysis, and reformist horizons. While North America once again bakes in a record-breaking heat wave this week, the “pragmatic” options in the field of politics are intended to swing us to one of two presidential candidates, each a loyal servant to fossil capital, and each wholly committed to the survival of the economy at the expense of any form of collective flourishing. Adam Greenfield’s new book Lifehouse offers vital proposals to escape from this trap. Counterposing our pragmatism to that of the system, he uses a designer’s eye to find the correct scale at which we can begin practically building structures for dignified collective survival in the face of what he calls the “Long Emergency,” and perhaps, begin planning a counterattack. The framework of the Long Emergency offers a useful reconceptualization of the entire sequence of climate change. It is vital, he argues, to grasp how “the second- and third-order consequences of global heating” engender a “breach in the ordinary that simultaneously challenges the structures of power we’re familiar with, endangers most everything we hold dear, and furnishes us with a rare opportunity to build something more in line with our deepest values.” Greenfield’s proposal — the construction of “lifehouses” — is neither a rigid formula nor a panacea. Rather, it proposes a new way of viewing the spaces discarded by our decaying society, and for developing strategic forms of action for their appropriation and collective usage that operate at an appropriate scale and temporality. Such a strategy must be modest in its beginnings, yet capable of pulling us into the real stakes of shared life in our neighborhoods; above all, it must be effective in creating collective power and resilience not just in a hypothetical future crisis, but now . In this way, the Lifehouse may be understood as a contribution to the ongoing debate over the role of autonomous structures in confronting capitalist crisis and social conflict, from Berlin (https://illwill.com/fire-to-the-houseprojects-2) to San Cristóbal (https://illwill.com/zapatista-autonomy). Lifehouse is available from Verso Books next month. Below are two selections from the chapter “Beyond Hope.” And so we find ourselves at a moment of decision. What can we do now, to make our way through the terrifying set of conditions we’ve inherited? What choices are available to us? We can buy less, and more locally, in the hope that in aggregating and responding to our purchase signals, the market will commit itself, permanently and worldwide, to a low-carbon production pathway. We can vote, in the hope of electing legislatures and governments committed to real climate action and able to see their policies enacted as binding law. We can protest, in the hope that legislators will note and heed the will of their constituents, and that governments and transnational bodies can be pushed toward a more aggressive defense of the planet, whether they were elected or not. We can engage in civil disobedience, in the hope that we can convince enough of our fellow citizens of the lateness of the hour, and that they, too, will be motivated to do something . We can engage in the sabotage of extractive industries, in the hope that their calculus of return on investment can be shifted, and that shareholders will tire of plundering the Earth for so little in the way of gain. We can work toward the revolutionary seizure of power, in the hope that we will succeed in time to take meaningful action on climate, and that our success will inspire other would-be insurgents to undertake and accomplish the same, everywhere. We can entrust our fate to technical means, in the hope that someone somewhere will invent a way of safely decarbonizing the atmosphere, or reflecting the sun’s hea…
