---
title: "Anarchism and syndicalism in an African port city"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-anarchism-and-syndicalism-in-an-african-port-city"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "the revolutionary traditions of Cape Town’s multiracial working class, 1904–1931"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-anarchism-and-syndicalism-in-an-african-port-city.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-anarchism-and-syndicalism-in-an-african-port-city.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Introduction        Early Cape labor and the left in the literature        Context and background        Across the color line: the SDF, anarchism and mass organizing        The SDF, anarchism and proletarian counterculture        The rise of IWW-style syndicalism; the union upsurge        The IWA in Cape Town: rethinking the ICU        Syndicalist union activism, black, white and red        Conclusion: from syndicalism to the CPSA, and beyond        References This paper examines the development of anarchism and syndicalism in early twentieth century Cape Town, South Africa, drawing attention to a crucial but neglected chapter of labor and left history. Central to this story were the anarchists in the local Social Democratic Federation (SDF), and the revolutionary syndicalists of the Industrial Socialist League, the Industrial Workers of Africa (IWA), and the Sweets and Jam Workers’ Industrial Union. These revolutionary anti-authoritarians, Africans, Coloureds and whites, fostered a multiracial radical movement – considerably preceding similar achievements by the Communist Party of South Africa (CPSA) in this port city. They were also part of a larger anarchist and syndicalist movement across the southern African subcontinent. Involved in activist centers, propaganda, public meetings, cooperatives, demonstrations, union organizing and strikes, and linked into international and national radical networks, Cape Town’s anarchists and syndicalists had an important impact on organizations like the African Political Organization (APO), the Cape Federation of Labour Unions, the Cape Native Congress, the CPSA, the General Workers Union, and the Industrial and Commercial Workers Union of Africa (ICU). This paper is therefore also a contribution to the recovery of the history of the first generation of African and Coloured anti-capitalist radicals, and part of a growing international interest in anarchist and syndicalist history. This paper examines the development of anarchism and syndicalism in Cape Town, one of South Africa’s two main port cities, in the early twentieth century. [1] One aim is to draw attention to a crucial but neglected chapter of labor and left history. The anarchist/syndicalist current in Cape Town was part of a larger anarchist/syndicalist movement active across the southern African subcontinent. [2] This movement has been almost totally ignored in the literature. Second, the paper demonstrates that these revolutionary anti-authoritarians fostered – indeed, pioneered – Cape Town’s important radical, multiracial socialist tradition. When describing that movement as a ‘multiracial’ one, the paper means the following: that its principles were determinedly internationalist, seeking to forge a movement across the color line; that its program opposed racial prejudice and racial discrimination, statutory and otherwise; and that its composition, both leadership and popular base, was multiracial, that is, African, Coloured and white. This leftwing multiracial project was a truly remarkable achievement for the racially divided colonial South Africa of the time, and considerably predates the better-known efforts of the Communist Party of South Africa (CPSA, formed 1921) – something that party’s preeminence in the literature has obscured. The multiracial anarchist and syndicalist project, of course, always operated in a working class divided by language, occupation, neighborhood, and race, compounded by mutual distrusts: this simply makes it all the more remarkable that these barriers were assaulted and, to an important extent, breached. Third, in recovering this pre-CPSA history of left and labor militancy, the paper begins to piece together the forgotten story of the country’s first generation of African and Coloured anti-capitalist radicals. Few have been recognized – let alone canonized – in local nationalist and communist narratives; even now, the leading figures of this trail-blazing generation a…
