---
title: "The ABC’s of Revolutionary Unionism"
author: "F.N. Brill"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/f-n-brill-the-abc-s-of-revolutionary-unionism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-04-10 from www.iww.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "f-n-brill-the-abc-s-of-revolutionary-unionism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/f-n-brill-the-abc-s-of-revolutionary-unionism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Principles        How the IWW Organizes        Methods and Tactics Since 1970 there has been a great change has come over the world. A shift in “wealth” unknown previously has impoverished millions and made a handful rich beyond all previous dreams. We can see: Today, the world’s 340 Billionaires control more wealth than the 2 BILLION poorest people do. Everyday we witness starvation, environmental degradation and the destruction of human culture for what? To make a couple of thousand people rich and powerful. We have seen the collapse of the so-called Communist system and the start of a free market system not significantly different. We see the shift of industrialism to the former socialist countries and the “developing” world and with it the rise of sweatshop conditions and wholesale theft of resources. The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or Wobblies) is a revolutionary union in continuous existence since 1905. The IWW was founded by North American rank and file workers who wanted a truly radical, democratic union. Amongst trade unionists the Wobblies are famous, and Bosses fear us. Through our democratic structure, flexible tactics, solidarity and a vision for the future, the IWW’s influence has been and continues to be felt throughout the world. And the IWW is needed even more today than in the past. We hope this introduction to our union will inspire you to join with us to create One Big Union of all workers and eliminate the scourge of Capitalism and class society once and for all. The Preamble to the Constitution of the IWW is our basic statement of principles: The working class and the employing class have nothing in common. There can be no peace so long as hunger and want are found among millions of working people and the few, who make up the employing class, have all the good things in life. Between these two classes a struggle must go on until the workers of the world organize as a class, take possession of the earth and the machinery of production, abolish the wage system, and live in harmony with the Earth. We find that the centering of the management of industries into fewer and fewer hands makes the trade unions unable to cope with the ever-growing power of the employing class. The trade unions foster a state of affairs which allows one set of workers to be pitted against another set of workers in the same industry, thereby helping defeat one another in wage wars. Moreover, the trade unions aid the employing class to mislead the workers into the belief that the working class have interests in common with their employers. These conditions can be changed and the interest of the working class upheld only by an organization formed in such a way that all it’s members in any one industry, or in all industries if necessary, cease work whenever a strike or lockout is on in any department thereof, thus making an injury to one an injury to all. Instead of the conservative motto, “A fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work,” we must inscribe on our banner the revolutionary watchword, “Abolition of the wage system.” It is the historic mission of the working class to do away with capitalism. The army of production must be organized, not only for the everyday struggle with capitalists, but also to carry on production when capitalism shall have been overthrown. By organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old. To Emancipate the Working Class — The IWW believes that by acting in solidarity, in union, we are building a new world in the shell of the old. Through solidarity we will create a free world with the good things of life available for all. Yes, the IWW is radical. It is as radical as a scientist in her laboratory, as radical as a surgeon planning the removal of a diseased growth, as radical as a teacher must be to tell the truth. It is well to note that from radicalism has flowed all that makes life better today than yesterday. As in the past, radicalism is th…
