---
title: "Confessions of a Mild-Mannered Enemy of the State"
author: "Ken Knabb"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ken-knabb-confessions-of-a-mild-mannered-enemy-of-the-state"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Public Secrets: Collected Skirmishes of Ken Knabb (1997). No copyright. Retrieved on September 18, 2010 from www.bopsecrets.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ken-knabb-confessions-of-a-mild-mannered-enemy-of-the-state.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ken-knabb-confessions-of-a-mild-mannered-enemy-of-the-state.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Part 1 (1945–1969)        Childhood        How I became an atheist        Shimer College and first independent adventures        Berkeley in the sixties        Kenneth Rexroth        How I evaded the draft        How I became an anarchist      Part 2 (1969–1977)        How I became a situationist        1044        Contradiction        A fresh start        The “Notice” group        The breaking of a fellowship      Part 3 (1977–1997)        Japan and Hong Kong        The SI Anthology        Rock climbing        Rexroth again        Zen practice        Reading, writing, translating and music        How this book came to be “If the world reproaches me for talking too much about myself, I reproach the world for not even thinking about itself.” — Montaigne I was born in 1945 in Louisiana, where my mother had gone to be with my father at an army camp. While he was overseas we lived on her parents’ farm in Minnesota. When he returned a couple years later, we moved to his home town in the Missouri Ozarks. Moving at a somewhat slower pace than most of the country, Plainstown still maintained much of that small-town, early-twentieth-century, pre-television American life idealized by Norman Rockwell — the world of porch swings and lazy afternoons, Boy Scouts and vacant-lot baseball, square dances and church picnics, county fairs, summer camps, autumn leaves, white Christmases. That way of life has often been disparaged, but it did have some advantages over the plastic suburban lifestyle that was already beginning to replace it. Despite their naïveté in many regards, the inhabitants of the Show-Me State retained some vestiges of Mark Twainian skepticism and common sense. Even the poorest people often owned their own home or farm. Extended families provided a social cushion if anyone fell on hard times. Things were quiet and safe. A kid could grow up without much awareness of the problems in the outside world. Yearly visits to the Minnesota farm maintained another link with earlier traditions. I still remember burrowing in the huge hayloft in the old barn; exploring the Victorian house, with its old-fashioned furniture and intriguing things like a clothes chute that ran from the second floor all the way down to the musty basement full of strange curios and contraptions left over from the previous century; or traipsing after my grandfather, a spry old guy still working vigorously in the fields in his late eighties. My father was one of the last of the old-fashioned family doctors — the kind who used to deliver successive generations of babies and who charged $5 for a house call, even if it was in the middle of the night — or sometimes nothing at all if the family was in difficult circumstances. Like his father before him, he combined full-time doctoring with part-time farming; he still does a little of the latter, though he retired from medical practice a couple years ago. My mother was trained as a physical therapist, but spent most of her time as a homemaker taking care of me and my two sisters. My earliest and best friend, Sam Thomas, was two years older and lived just around the corner. We played all the typical games — baseball, basketball, football, badminton, ping pong, kick the can, marbles, cards, Monopoly, Scrabble; but what I remember enjoying most of all were the activities that we created for ourselves — elaborate constructions with Lincoln Logs or erector sets, deployment of little metal cowboys and Indians among forts and tunnels in a sandbox, building our own club house and tree house, putting on shows and carnivals for the other kids in the neighborhood. I also have fond memories of grade school. Although the educational system was not particularly “progressive,” it was very flexible and encouraging for me. Once I had demonstrated that the usual lessons were a breeze, the teachers allowed me, and to a lesser extent a few of my more intelligent classmates, to skip some of the routine tasks and pursue independently chos…
