---
title: "Constitution"
author: "Workers Solidarity Movement"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/workers-solidarity-movement-constitution"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The document that gives the basic definition of the Workers Solidarity Movement and which lays down how we make decisions and how we operate. Last updated at Spring 2012 National Conference. Retrieved on 15th October 2021 from www.wsm.ie"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "workers-solidarity-movement-constitution.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/workers-solidarity-movement-constitution.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Preamble          Core Principles        1. Name:        2. Membership:        3. Branches:        4. National Conference:        5. The Delegate Council        6. Working Groups        7. Organisational principles:        8. Minority rights:        9. Internal Bulletin:        10. National officers:          National Secretary          Internal Secretary          National Treasurer          International Secretary          Anarkismo secretary        11. Publications:        12. Finance:        13. Policy process The world’s wealth is produced by us, the working class. We ought to enjoy the benefits. We want to abolish the system of capitalism which places wealth and power in the hands of a few, and replace it with workers control and socialism. We do not mean the farce called ‘socialism’ practiced in Russia, China, and other police states — the system in those countries is no more than another form of capitalism. We stand for a new society where there will be no bosses or bureaucrats. A society which will be run in a really democratic way by working people, through councils in the workplaces and community. We want to abolish authoritarian relationships and replace them with control from the bottom up — not the top down. All the industries, all the means of production and distribution will be commonly owned, and placed under the management of those working in them. Production will be organised and planned by the federation of workers councils, not for profit but to meet peoples’ needs. The guiding principle will be “from each according to ability, to each according to need”. We are opposed to all coercive authority, we believe that the only permissible limit on the freedom of the individual is that they do not encroach on the freedom of others. We do not ask to be made rulers nor do we intend to seize power “on behalf of the working class”. Instead we hold that socialism can only be created by the mass of ordinary people. Anything less is bound to lead to no more than replacing one set of bosses with another. We are opposed to the state because it is not neutral, it can not be made to serve the interests of workers. The structures of the state are only necessary when a minority seeks to rule over the majority. We can create our own structures, which will be open and democratic, to ensure the efficient running of everyday life. We are proud to be part of the tradition of libertarian socialism, of anarchism. The anarchist movement has taken root in the working class of many counties because it serves their interests — not the interests of the power seekers and professional politicians. In short we fight for the immediate needs and interests of the working class under the existing set up, while seeking to encourage the necessary political understanding and activity to overthrow capitalism and its state, and lead to the birth of an anarchist society. We have detailed position papers on all the areas where we are active. These form the collectively agreed policy of the WSM. Disagreement and debate around these papers is continuous, these collective position are constantly being modified so obviously we do not expect members to agree with every detail. All members are however expected to broadly agree with points 1 to 9 below which outline the core of our anarchism. Anarchism will be created by the class struggle between the vast majority of society (the working class) and the tiny minority that currently rule. A successful revolution will require that anarchist ideas become the leading ideas within the working class. This will not happen spontaneously. Our role is to make anarchist ideas the leading ideas or, as it is sometimes expressed, to become a “leadership of ideas”. We reject the idea that society can be changed through ‘good people’ gaining control of the power structures. This means we reject both the electoral strategy of the social democratic and green parties and the ‘revolutionary’ strategy of the various left g…
