---
title: "George Woodcock"
author: "Sam Dolgoff"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sam-wiener-pen-name-of-sam-dolgoff-george-woodcock"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Muddled History of Anarchism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sam-wiener-pen-name-of-sam-dolgoff-george-woodcock.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sam-wiener-pen-name-of-sam-dolgoff-george-woodcock.epub"
    hosted: false
---

George Woodcock’s Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements (New York & Cleveland, World Publishing Co., 1962) A serious history of Anarchism in English is most timely, for there is a revival of interest in our ideas everywhere, and our English movement is growing. The author was once an active Anarchist and has written extensively on the subject. This book, therefore, is regarded as authoritative and is widely used in academic circles. The author has made available for the first time in English historical data from French, Italian, German and Spanish sources. He gives biographical sketches of Godwin, Proudhon, Bakunin, Kropotkin, Stirner, Tolstoy and others. Woodcock discusses their ideas–correcting popular misconceptions of Anarchism which confuse Anarchism with Nihilism, bomb throwing and general chaos. He points out that Anarchism claims to be a constructive theory for the regeneration of society and that it is destructive only insofar as it aims to remove the parasitic institutions which block progress. A historical work reveals as much about the author’s state of mind as it does about the facts which he records. A careful reading of his book indicates that Woodcock is confused. He rejects Anarchism as a practical alternative to Statism. At the same time he has not given up his objections to the State. Unable to work out a consistent viewpoint of his own, he becomes enmeshed in his own contradictions. For example, Woodcock criticises the Anarchists for “the weakness of their practical proposals for the society that would follow their hypothetical revolution.” Two pages later he contradicts himself: “the Anarchist movement showed a concrete aspect of libertarianism that at least sketched out an alternative to the totalitarian way.” (pages 472, 474) Woodcock devotes five pages (393–398) to the constructive achievements of the Anarchists in reorganising economic and social life during the Spanish Revolution. He even admits that “the Anarchist methods of organising economic and social relations turned out to be at least as practical as authoritarian methods.” All competent observers, including non-Anarchists, are agreed that Anarchist reconstruction was more efficient than under the authoritarian nightmare and had the supreme virtue of combining good administration with freedom and equality. Woodcock also identifies Anarchist tendencies in various popular communal movements in different parts of the world. If one wanted to demonstrate the practicability of Anarchism he would find plenty of examples in Woodcock’s book–anyone except Woodcock. He says, “Such scattered examples of constructive Anarchist efforts do not prove that a complete Anarchist society, such as Kropotkin, for example, envisaged can come into existence or that it would work if it did.” (see pages 472-74-75) Woodcock is referring to Kropotkin’s Conquest of Bread , a work not intended to be the final blueprint of a final Anarchist society. He only wanted to demonstrate how Anarchist principles could be applied to practical problems. Nowhere does Woodcock tell why Kropotkin was wrong. Yet, a host of modern thinkers, including Erich Fromm, Martin Buber, Ashley Montague, Lewis Mumford, Daniel Guérin in their re-examination of socialist thought find practical alternatives to Statism in the Anarchist classics and libertarian social structures. Woodcock again contradicts himself on the matter of anarchist participation in the Loyalist Government during the Spanish Civil War. On page 391 he correctly denounces the anarchist leaders for joining the governments of Madrid and Barcelona. This violation of basic anarchist principles led to the defeat of the revolution. Yet in the section dealing with events leading up to the Civil War, Woodcock shows strong sympathy for the advocates of governmental collaboration as against such “extremists” as Durruti, Ascaso and other comrades of the F.A.I. (Iberian Anarchist Federation). He even slanders the consistent ana…
