---
title: "Fighting for Peace"
author: "Alex Sanchez, Isaac Ontiveros"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/isaac-ontiveros-fighting-for-peace"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Alex Sanchez on Wars and Borders at Home and Abroad"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "isaac-ontiveros-fighting-for-peace.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/isaac-ontiveros-fighting-for-peace.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The US government’s war on gangs has crossed, created, and exploited many borders. Its roots extend from the state’s attempt to neutralize oppressed peoples’ struggles for self-determination inside and outside the US, and its violence has targeted communities from Los Angeles to San Salvador. This war has led to the deaths of thousands and the imprisonment, impoverishment, disenfranchisement and dispossession of many more. Through his work in organizations such as Homies Unidos, Alex Sanchez has worked across many different borders as part of brave efforts to stop violence, make peace, and most importantly, make lasting shifts in power for those communities living through the war on gangs. Isaac Ontiveros [IO]: While we often think first of national borders between countries, we can also think of the borders between people who are locked up and their loved ones on the outside or the economic and racial barriers that people come up against. In the work you do, how do you relate to borders? Alex Sanchez [AS]: One of the ways that people have dealt with oppression is by fighting it, like with what happened in El Salvador. Guerilla groups came together under the FMLN [Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front] and they started fighting the oppressive government that was funded by the United States. Many people fled. Some fled because they were being persecuted by death squads and the military, and, ironically, they fled to the country that was funding this war—the United States. When you cross these lines, the border from El Salvador to Guatemala, from Guatemala to Mexico, and from Mexico to the United States, you start looking at that picture and asking: “What am I? Who am I?” We create borders all the time. Within our own families—“It’s our family”—we create that nucleus of what to belong to, what tribe we belong to… that’s nothing new. When it comes to issues of community, then we’re talking about larger issues than ourselves. How does that community identify you? How do you identify within that community? I was a Salvadoran who was part of this wave of immigrant children who came from El Salvador in the late 1970s. We came from a war-torn community where we had been exposed to violence as children, and came to communities here in the US where our culture clashed with other cultures, with other ethnic groups that didn’t understand where we were coming from. We started dealing with these identity issues, and people creating their own issues, creating their own borders within their own communities, to identify their own little tribes, their own little organizations that they were using to deal with their own problems. I got into a gang to get answers to some of those questions I didn’t have answers to. The street organizations started quickly and became so big because they provided a community to these kids that were disenfranchised; that nobody gave a damn about; that were seeking their identity. You had the war, children of war, immigrants. Most of them spoke only Spanish. Most of them were targeted by the other more traditional gangs. And what happened is that once you started creating that protection within the community, then you start having issues with others outside that community. So, friction is created. This form of organization became criminalized and introduced to the criminal justice system. That’s when these other borders within our communities were created. We started fighting each other. People were targeted, there were victims, and there was also internalized oppression that you’ve been growing up with. You let it out on each other. You cross that line in your community, that invisible line, and let it out on somebody else. You cross the street, you cross that border. There’s no physical border around certain areas, it’s not visible, but we knew they were there. We were dealing with this land that had been divided by these borders: the Brown being divided by the white, which is how we looked at the United States…
