---
title: "The Anarchists from the White Mountains"
author: "Morten Søndergaard"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/morten-sondergaard-the-anarchists-from-the-white-mountains"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Original title: Anarkisterne fra de hvide bjerge. Translator: Christopher Sand-Iversen. Published by RSS Press. Original Danish version first published in Pist Protta no. 84, edited by Anna Maria Orrù, Morten Søndergaard, Jesper Rasmussen, Åse Eg Jørgensen and Jesper Fabricius. RSS Press www.rssprss"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "morten-sondergaard-the-anarchists-from-the-white-mountains.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/morten-sondergaard-the-anarchists-from-the-white-mountains.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1.        2.        3.        4.        5.        6.        7.        8. The mountains are the first thing you notice. They look like they are capped with snow. But on closer inspection, you see it’s not snow. The mountains themselves are white. White as snow. They are the marble mountains around Carrara, Massa, and Pietrasanta. The mountain I can see from my window is called Monte Altissimo, the highest mountain . The house I’m writing in lies on a mountain. It’s called Montepreti. The Mountain of the Priests. Alright, mountain is a bit much; my mountain is 147 metres high. 147 metres above sea level at the highest point. I say, My mountain. 147 metres above the sea that lies down there, blue and trembling in the sunlight. Height above sea level is an important measurement with regard to the 200 or so olive trees I tend here, because the height determines whether or not they are attacked by the olive fruit fly. It’s just high enough here for the attacks to be milder than down in the valley. Down in the valley, I say. I say, My mountain is 147 metres high. It’s just a little hillock in comparison with the real mountains here: Monte Altissimo, 1,589 metres above sea level; Pania Secca, 1,711 metres above sea level; Monte Sella, 1,739 metres above sea level; Pania della Croce, 1,858 metres above sea level; Monte Tambura, 1,891 metres above sea level. Above the sea, the sea, the sea. Down there lies the sea with its sub-aqueous mountain ranges. The azure blue sea where the white Ur-marble fauna in the form of shellfish once sank to the seabed. Now time has turned bed and mountain upside down. All the little compressed sea organisms have been compacted into a white time-stone. Marble is an industry with a turnover in the billions. Most of it, our local guide to the mountains tells us, becomes toothpaste. Toothpaste? Yes. Most of the 30,000 tons of marble that are quarried every week — every week! — are ground down to powder and sold to industry, becoming part of all sorts of processes and products, including foodstuffs and pharmaceuticals. The quarried material is equal to 4–5 million tons a year, let’s say for argument’s sake 4.5, which equals 1,636,636 cubic metres, with a volume of 1 by 1 by 1.6 km. This is roughly equal to a 36 km long queue of tourist buses, or a motorway paved with a 3 cm thick layer of marble stretching from Carrara to Stockholm. Only 20 to 25% of this volume is quarried in blocks, the rest as loose stones, or ‘scaglie’, to be crushed into powder. Of the blocks, only 20% are actually carved into statues, monuments or artworks. The other 80% are used to produce objects such as gravestones, ashtrays, and sinks, and in the building sector for tiles, stone cladding, and columns. Over the last 20 years as much marble has been quarried as in the last 2000 years. Marble is no longer really worth anything. In Pietrasanta all the pavements are made of marble, the benches and the skate park are of marble. You have to duck to avoid it, literally. Fatal accidents are still frequent in this huge industry. Enormous mounds of marble are unloaded around the town. It was once a grind to get it out, but not any more; an endless chain of lorries transports the blocks down, the roads lead all the way up to the tops of the mountains, where the marble is whitest. This marble is the most sought-after. These layers of stone once lay at the bottom of the sea. Over the course of about 200 million years, their weight pressed the calcium carbonate shells and skeletons into a solid three-dimensional salt (marble). Following this, gigantic underground forces pushed these layers upwards, creating a huge highland made of carbonic stone. Erosion slowly carved this highland into the mountain range known today as the Apuan Alps. The highly compressed layers now lie like snow on the peaks, waiting to be cut out by gigantic diamond-edged saws. The Statuario marble, that of the purest and best quality, is still highly sought-after: for i…
