---
title: "Antifa, Autism, and The Border Wall Around Punk"
author: "moss williams"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/moss-williams-antifa-autism-and-the-border-wall-around-punk"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Content warning: reclamation of ableist slurs, discussion of violence, harassment, genocide, and suicide Submitted by the author. To be published in a forthcoming book on critical engagements between punk, anarchism and other radical politics and practices to be edited by Jim Donaghey, Caroline Kalt"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "moss-williams-antifa-autism-and-the-border-wall-around-punk.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/moss-williams-antifa-autism-and-the-border-wall-around-punk.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Endnotes The disgusting, sticky fog of “Lebensunwerten Leben” still hangs over all of us disabled weirdos like teargas after a riot. “Life unworthy of life” was the Nazi philosophy that guided their hands to the first experiments in playing god by poisoning disabled children in their care, an expression of the underlying self-righteousness of eugenics which remains a bedrock of modern life. There’s a general air that we shouldn’t really be here, that our existence is an embarrassment to the body politic, and a truly strong volkskorp wouldn’t have us in it ruining the image (and the bloodlines). As a strange one under capitalism I have found that me and many people I love drive ourselves extremely hard trying desperately to prove ourselves worthy of existence. I’ve been with my kin on the front lines of antifascist street actions in what often amounts to a very public meltdown and seen all the ways our pain and our fear and our anger only register to the media and the public at large as spectacle. Stop being so dramatic. It’s only fascism. Be quiet. Calm down. Shut your mouth. Just die. And we do. I’ve never been particularly good at the social stuff. Punk has always appealed to me for that reason, but I’ve always been on the sidelines of punk looking in, unable to perform my own unintelligibility and rage in the proper way for acceptance. The signature hostility to outsiders which feels safe on the inside of the bubble is often directed my way. My applications are denied for reasons unintelligible to me, unclear on the criteria by which I am being judged and too anxious to even ask. And so I have ended up in the most violent spot of all: right outside the border. If it was just dismissiveness and suspicion I would be alright, but like any border, my exile makes me prey for traffickers. “I can get you in. Come back to this hotel with me.” (I declined; my heart shattered into a thousand knives.) This is unfortunately a common story for people like me. Neurodivergents. Autistics. Having been made to deny our own needs and impulses throughout childhood means we tend not to understand the difference between the ‘reasonable’ social interactions and the unreasonable kinds, since what is expected of us in neurotypical society is already uncomfortable to begin with (if not downright abusive). Throughout my life any behavior from me other than quiet, helpful, distant, and most importantly compliant has often been perceived by the outside world as aggressive, disruptive, offensive, or even insane. Any hint of minor frustration is seen as a threat. Lack of eye contact is seen as a sign someone is lying or malicious, but also too much eye contact is invasive, suspicious, creepy, dangerous. There’s no way to win this game when the rule is that we are doing it wrong, and in a society with police this often amounts to injury, imprisonment, or death. Even the few societal rules I have learned are completely inverted in punk. That is its beauty, but also can be difficult. Attempts at a lack of rules are often just a new set. This makes punk spaces stressful for me, where everyone is on high alert for suspicious behavior. Not understanding the social rules means I present as uncategorized so people place me in whatever role they can find in their head. When I’m lost or writing in my journal or eating alone I have been assumed to be a food critic, security, prostitute, waitress, unhoused, store clerk, etc. Being nondescript is a safety tactic, but punks and anarchists are highly attuned to manipulation and infiltration and my personal defenses against violence clashed mightily with theirs. Most people pay less attention than they realize about who is around and a friendly aloof demeanor and walking with purpose gets me in a lot of doors, but not the ones I really want to be in. People see what they want to see, and a paranoid, ableist, misogynistic space saw a threat and a fraud. My mom introduced me to punk rock as a child. I’d grown up w…
