---
title: "Anarchist All the Way Down"
author: "James R. Martel"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-r-martel-anarchist-all-the-way-down"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Walter Benjamin’s subversion of authority in text, thought and action"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "james-r-martel-anarchist-all-the-way-down.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-r-martel-anarchist-all-the-way-down.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In this paper, I will be describing how Walter Benjamin is “anarchist all the way down.” By this, I mean that Benjamin is not only an anarchist by political temperament but in just about every other way possible as well. Although Benjamin tended to refer to himself as a communist, as I will try to show, his version of communism is anarchist through and through. In this paper I am going to focus on three ways in which Benjamin is anarchist: theologically, politically and linguistically. My argument throughout will be that Benjamin offers us a profoundly anarchist approach (even an anarchist method, as oxymoronic as that may sound) which encompasses not only what he says but how he says it. Theologically, Benjamin offers us a vision of God whose essential function in terrestrial matters is to destroy false notions that human beings project onto the divine. Rather than serving as a basis for the false models of political and legal authority that leads to what he calls “mythic violence,” for Benjamin God manifests the failure of these projections to be true, leaving us radically and utterly on our own. Politically speaking, such a view enables us to act in ways that are not predetermined by myths, either of the divine or secular variety. When we fight the sense of an inevitable fate that comes along with mythic violence, for Benjamin, we become aware of the ways that human beings are capable of making their own decisions both as individuals and as members of a community. As I will argue further, this is a profoundly anarchist insight insofar as it both allows and invites the politicization of vast spheres of human life that are normally considered to be already, and invariably, determined. Finally, in terms of his linguistic practices, Benjamin’s own writings perpetuate the anarchism he describes and promotes in his texts. As a writer, Benjamin is concerned above all with suspending and subverting figures of authority. This includes his own authority in his texts. For Benjamin, if an author speaks of decentering authority but retains a central authority as a writer in order to do so, he or she undercuts the inherent anarchism of that message. Benjamin avoids this problem by turning to techniques such as allegory and montage in order to make his own textual authority radically unavailable. In this way he repeats for the reader the position of the subject of divine acts of violence. As with that subject, Benjamin’s reader too is left to her own devices, shorn of any hope for rescue or redemption by any authority figure. In this way, theologically, politically and linguistically, Benjamin offers something of a seamless web of anarchistic practices; hence he is anarchist all the way down. To begin then, let me now get to the substance of the piece by spending some time describing how Benjamin’s anarchism works in the three dimensions I described, beginning with his theology. Whereas the large bulk of anarchist writings and leftist writings more generally are staunchly atheist, Benjamin himself is just as adamant about the critical role that God plays in human existence. For Benjamin, however, the nature and actions of God function in ways that are utterly unlike the way more orthodox renderings of God’s work in the Jewish and Christian traditions he engages with. For Benjamin, God is completely unavailable to us; any attempt to speak for or about God is inherently idolatrous; the promulgations of such idolatry leads to a completely false sense, not only of God but of reality itself, leading to the condition that Benjamin (taking the term from Marx) calls the “phantasmagoria.” For Benjamin, as already noted, God serves, not to tell us truths, since we can no longer have such knowledge, but rather enacts and demonstrates the failure of that truth in the world. For Benjamin, as far as human beings are concerned, God exists only as a wholly negative force that disrupts the falsities of the phantasmagoria. This situation was not always the…
