---
title: "Black Seed: Issue 7"
author: "Mallory Wournos, Anpoa Duta Collective, Anonymous, dot matrix, Goat, Aragorn!, Dominique Ganawaabi"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-black-seed-issue-7"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A journal of indigenous anarchy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-black-seed-issue-7.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-black-seed-issue-7.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Editorial      Revolution of Fungal Life by Anonymous      Whatever-Veganism by Aragorn!        A mild critique        What is true        What is differently true        What is said        Pro health        Biting Back: A radical response to non-vegan arguments (excerpt)      Towards an Anthropology as Science Fiction by Dominique Ganawaabi      Post-Indian Aphorisms by Dominique Ganawaabi      The Anpoa Duta Collective: Part 1      My Mind Below this Beautiful Country: Part 2        Tatsetan/Tahltan: A Land Based Nomadic Language        Indigenizing, Land Defense, and Decolonization      We Have Nothing To Say: Technology and the Economizing of Communication by Goat        Defining technology and technique to bring about their ruin        Marx’s technophilia: why the left will never be able to critique technology        Techno-Capital Spirituality        Techno-pessimism: Ellul’s Technological Society and Paoli’s Demotivational Training        Applied Anti-Tech      The Situation is Hopeless, Just Hopeless: A Pessimist’s Review of The Uninhabitable Earth by Mallory Wournos      There’s A Twitter for That?! by Aragorn!        There is an indigenous Twitter?        Support and support        Orientalism        Federalism vs Confederalism      BC Indigenous Land Defense Updates        Secwepemc 'Tiny House Warriors' and TransMountain Extension Tar Sands Pipeline Resistance        Unist'ot'en Camp and Coastal GasLink Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) This issue of Black Seed, the seventh in five years, represents yet another editorial group change and yet another optimistic push for the project. We can now say that the project is indigenous-led, for what that’s worth. We intended for this issue to be filled with manifestos about what that means, but perhaps these fragments say as much as we can in manifesto-language Black Seed is a publication of an indigenous anarchy. Two words that mean a million or, to put it another way, we are here, from this place, and we are free from the rules that have come before us, from the ideologies of Empire and Colony. This ridiculous assertion is possible because whatever hope or vision we have for the future begins with the genocide of the people we come from and from an engrossing political fantasy that has entailed holding the contradictory positions of individual freedom (in the fantasy of liberal ideas that have freedom meaning the freedom of ownership and markets) with collective responsibility (meaning we are responsible for fixing the social problems that resulted from too much liberalism). Distinct from the neo-liberal collectivism of postmodern America is an indigenous anarchy and the practice and belief in here-ness and freedom. Indigenous is a troubled word. We like that— because living is a troubled affair—but we understand the confusion when one feels unclear about our intention when using it. It is a classic “overloaded operator” in that it means several, more-or-less unrelated things, which rely on the context of the word more than the word itself. It means something similar but perhaps more general than “native” (as in Native American). It also means a spiritual connection to the place you inhabit that is indivisible. It is about blood and it is about land and it is about spirit. Anarchy is a troubled word also. Anarchism is the political belief in a certain kind of world, with specific traditions, histories, and tensions; anarchy is the set of moments that have actually occurred, where that belief was actually put to a test. These specificities and distinctions do not exactly roll off the tongue. Not only does the term itself invite confusion but the partisans of the position are actively disagreeable. For us to use the word at all, we have to suffer association with others whose definitions we disagree with (and they us). But we refuse to let go of the brutal optimism of wanting a world free from terrible systems and their histories. We desire a freedom with the pedigree of Em…
