---
title: "An anarchist look at the ideas of James Connolly"
author: "Oisín Mac Giollamóir"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/oisin-mac-giollamoir-an-anarchist-look-at-the-ideas-of-james-connolly"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "the single most important figure in the history of the Irish left"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "oisin-mac-giollamoir-an-anarchist-look-at-the-ideas-of-james-connolly.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/oisin-mac-giollamoir-an-anarchist-look-at-the-ideas-of-james-connolly.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Syndicalist        Nationalist        Unity        Parliament        Legacy James Connolly is probably the single most important figure in the history of the Irish left. He was an organiser in the IWW in the USA but in Ireland is best known for his role in building the syndicalist phase of Irish union movement and for involving the armed defence body of that union, the Irish Citizens’ Army in the 1916 nationalist insurrection. This left a legacy claimed at one time or another not only by all the Irish left parties but also by the nationalists of Fianna Fail and Sinn Fein. In this article I will attempt to look at the long neglected anarchistic aspects of Connolly’s thought and ask the question was Connolly a libertarian? Connolly is one of those historical figures who can seem to have been both everything and nothing. People claim him for a myriad of political ideologies, many of which are irreconcilably opposed to one another. At times it can seem like he was little more than a confused revolutionary who was never sure what he was for or what he was against. Connolly held diverse opinions, (many of which I, unfortunately, will not have the space to go into here). At the same time his analysis is unique in that it possessed remarkable depth and clarity. Because of this, quotes can found in his work to enable almost anyone to claim him as an advocate of almost any political cause. Connolly was, of course, not an anarchist. He advocated parliamentary action, at times advocated a form of State Socialism and considered himself a nationalist. These positions are contradictory to anarchist thought. First and foremost James Connolly was a Socialist. And when asked to elaborate on his Socialist theory, he would always advocate Revolutionary Syndicalism. Readers of James Connolly may react by saying that almost nowhere in Connolly’s work can any mention of Syndicalism be found. This is simply because Connolly preferred to use the term ‘Industrial Unionism’ to Syndicalism. Leninists are very found of claiming that Connolly was only a syndicalist in his innocent youth and by the time of the Easter rising (his role in which secured his place in history) he had abandoned syndicalism. C. Desmond Greaves, the author of the definitive biography of James Connolly The Life and Times of James Connolly, wrote that by the beginning of 1916 ‘no more than a faint echo of syndicalism remained’ [1] . This is quite strange seeing as that in Connolly’s last major work the pamphlet The Re-Conquest of Ireland, published on the 14 th of December 1915, Connolly fervently advocates Syndicalism or as he calls it ‘Industrial Unionism’. Connolly writes: The principle of complete unity upon the Industrial plane must be unceasingly sought after; the Industrial union embracing all workers in each industry must replace the multiplicity of unions which now hamper and restrict our operations, multiply our expenses and divide our forces in face of the mutual enemy. With the Industrial Union as our principle of action, branches can be formed to give expression to the need for effective supervision of the affairs of the workshop, shipyard, dock or railway; each branch to consist of the men and women now associated in Labour upon the same technical basis as our craft unions of today. Add to this the concept of One Big Union embracing all, and you have not only the outline of the most effective form of combination for industrial warfare to-day, but also for Social Administration of the Co-operative Commonwealth of the future. A system of society in which the workshops, factories, docks, railways, shipyards, &c., shall be owned by the nation, but administered by the Industrial Unions of the respective industries, organised as above, seems best calculated to secure the highest form of industrial efficiency, combined with the greatest amount of individual freedom from state despotism. Such a system would, we believe, realise for Ireland the most radiant hopes of all h…
