---
title: "A Christmas Sermon"
author: "Ross Winn"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ross-winn-a-christmas-sermon"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally appearing in Winn’s Firebrand , Vol. I No. 4, December 1, 1902. Retrieved on March 13, 2012 from en.wikisource.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ross-winn-a-christmas-sermon.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ross-winn-a-christmas-sermon.epub"
    hosted: false
---

A great many years ago ther was born, in an obscure village of Palestine, a babe; and its parents were so poor that this little child came into the world among the cattle and was laid in a manger upon a couch of straw. This infant of lowly origin had not even the birth certificate of legal parentage, for his mother was a virgin, and he was the progeny of the gods — which in those days was the polite term for bastard. But above the humble place of this poor babe’s nativity there shone a bright and radiant star — the star of genius. The great world of that day was as indifferent to the doings of the common people, the toilers, as it is to-day. The birth of a prince was an affair of great moment — not because a prince was wiser, or better, or more noble than other men, but because he WAS a prince, the son of a king. But this babe in the manger was not a prince; he was the nameless offspring of poverty and shame. But the star of genius, which has seldom lighted the birth-advent of a tilted prince, stood over that lowly manger, and from the portals of that cattle stall in Bethlehem, a new age issued forth, an age that has been made glorious by the greatest achievements of the human race. This child, Jesus, as he grew to manhood, was not much of a success in life. He had no business enterprise, no financial ability. Instead of adapting himself to circumstances and going in to make his pile, he began to tramp around from place to place, making speeches against the rich and well-to-do, and stirring up discontent among the poor. He even attacked the religion of his time, and called the priests hypocrits, which was very wicked and impious, altho he doubtless told the truth. He assailed the established church of his day as bitterly as did Ingersoll the church of HIS day, and with far less politeness. He went around with a handful of ragged and shiftless followers like himself, for the most part ignorant fishermen, who could neither read nor write. He associated with rough and dissolute characters and was himself known as a winebibber and a glutton. He refused to condemn lewed women, but intimated that thy were but little worse than their male patrons. His beard and hair were unkempt, he was negligent in dress, and of course all the respectable well-to-do people called him an Anarchist, and though he should be locked up as a matter of precaution. His teachings were perfectly incomprehensible to the people of his day. Not even his own disciples understood him. He wanted to “divide up everything.” He was continually agitating against the social order. He talked about the best people in society in the most disrespectful manner, intimating that a full grown dromedary could gallop thru the eye of a cambric needle with less difficulty than a Wall street magnate would experience in squeezing under heaven’s golden gate. Like the true Anarchist, he was always “agin the government,” and was looked upon by the better classes as a perpetual nuisance and calamity howler. He went around making stump speeches and steet talks, in violation of the city ordinances. His motto seems to have been that of John Burns, “Down with all that’s up, and up with all that’s down.” He not only wanted the rich to give everything they possessed away to the shiftless poor, but he inculcated improvidence as a virtue. He said “take no thought for the morrow.” He wanted people to despise money and business affairs, and to emulate the example of the fowls of the air and the flowers of the field. He was opposed to authority, to government. He decried punishment, repudiated resistance to evil-doers. He said let the robbers rob; if they take your best Sunday coat, give them your Roosevelt hat or your necktie, or anything else that will satisfy them. Now, it is reasonably certain that he was not rightly understood. We do not know that he was correctly reported. He certainly would not be by the average American newspaper reporter of to-day. But assuming that Jesus really said the t…
