---
title: "Fleetwood"
author: "William Godwin"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-godwin-fleetwood"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "or, The New Man of Feeling"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-godwin-fleetwood.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-godwin-fleetwood.epub"
    hosted: false
---

   VOLUME THE FIRST      PREFACE.      CHAPTER I.      CHAPTER II      CHAPTER III      CHAPTER IV      CHAPTER V      CHAPTER VI      CHAPTER VII      CHAPTER VIII      CHAPTER IX      CHAPTER X      CHAPTER XI      CHAPTER XII      CHAPTER XIII      CHAPTER XIV      CHAPTER XV    VOLUME THE SECOND      CHAPTER I      CHAPTER II      CHAPTER III      CHAPTER IV      CHAPTER V      CHAPTER VI      CHAPTER VII      CHAPTER VIII      CHAPTER IX      CHAPTER X      CHAPTER XI      CHAPTER XII      CHAPTER XIII      CHAPTER XIV      CHAPTER XV.      CHAPTER XVI.      CHAPTER XVII.      CHAPTER XVIII.      CHAPTER XIX.      CHAPTER XX. YET another novel from the same pen, which has twice before claimed the patience in this form. The unequivocal indulgence which has been extended to my two former attempts, renders me doubly solicitous not to forfeit the kindness I have experienced. One caution I have particularly sought to exercise: "not to repeat, myself." Caleb Williams was a story of very surprising and uncomnmon events, but which were supposed to be entirely within the laws and established course of nature, as she operates in the planet we inhabit. The story of St. Leon is of the miraculous class; and its design to "mix human feelings and passions with incredible situations, and thus render them impressive and interesting." Some of those fastidious readers--they may be classed among the best friends and author has, if their admonistions are judiciously considered--who are willing to discover thos faults which do not offer temselves to very eye, have remarked, that both these tales are in a vicius style of writing; that Harace has long ago decided**, that the story we cannot believe, we are by all the laws of criticism called upon to hate; and that even the adventures of the honest secretary, who was first heard of ten years ago, are so much out of the usual road, that not one reader in a million can ever fear they will happen to himself. Gentlemen critics, I thank you. In the present volumes I have served you with a dish agreeable to your own receipt, though I cannot say with any sanguine hope of obtaining our approbation. The following story consists of such adventures, as for the most part have occurred to at least one half of the Englishmen now existing, who are of the same rank of life as my hero. Most of them have been at college, and shared in college excesses; most of them have afterward run a certain gauntlet of dissipation; most have married; and, I am afraid, there are few of the married tribe, who have not at some time or other had certain small misunderstandings with their wives**;--to be sure, they have not all of them felt and acted under these trite adventures as my hero does. In this little work the reader will scarely find any thing to "elevate and surprise;" and, if it has any merit, it must consist in the liveliness with which it brings things home to the imagination, and the reality it gives to the scenes it pourtrays. Yet, even in the present narrative, I have aimed at a certain kind of novelty; a novelty, which may be aptly expressed by a parody on a well known line of Pope; it relates Things often done, but never yet describ'd. In selecting among common and ordinary adventures, I have endeavored to avoid such as a thousand novels before mine have undertaken to develope. Multitudes of readers have themselves passed through the very incidents I relate; but, for the most part, no work has hitherto recorded them. If I have told them truly, I have added somewhat to the stock of books which should enable a recluse shut up in his closet, to form an idea of what is passing in the world. It is inconceivable meanwhie, how much by this choice of a subject, I increased the arduousness of my task. It is also so easy to do, a little better, or a little worse, what twenty authors have done before! If I had foreseen from the first all the difficultly of my project, my courage would have failed me to undertake the executio…
