---
title: "Dangerous and Unprofessional Content"
author: "Danisha Jenkins, Jess Dillard-Wright"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jess-dillard-wright-and-danisha-jenkins-dangerous-and-unprofessional-content"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Anarchist Dreams for Alternate Nursing Futures"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jess-dillard-wright-and-danisha-jenkins-dangerous-and-unprofessional-content.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jess-dillard-wright-and-danisha-jenkins-dangerous-and-unprofessional-content.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        1. Introduction        2. Have We Ever Been Nurses        3. Irreconcilable Praxes? Anarchism and Professionalized Nursing        4. Anarchist Visions for Nursing or Why Nurses Should Be Anarchist        5. Making the Anarchist Nurse—Tools for the Revolution        6. Nursing Practice as Direct Action          6.1. Cut the Cop Shit          6.2. Community Survival and Mutual Aid          6.3. Militant Joy        7. Conclusions        References Professionalized nursing and anarchism could not be more at odds. And yet, if nursing wishes to have a future in the precarious times in which we live and die, the discipline must take on the lessons that anarchism has on offer. Part love note to a problematic profession we love and hate, part fever dream of what could be, we set out to think about what nursing and care might look like after it all falls down, because it is all falling down. Drawing on alternate histories, alternate visions of nursing history, we imagine what nursing values would look like, embracing anarchist principles. We consider examples of community survival, mutual aid, and militant joy as strategies to achieve what nursing could be if nurses put an end to their cop shit, shrugging off their shroud of white cisheteropatriarchal femininity that manifests as professionalism and civility. We conclude with a call to action and a plan for skill-building because this can all be different. Keywords: anarchism; care; ethics; futurism; nursing Anarchism is dangerously destabilizing for professionalized nursing. Anarchism’s rejection of hierarchies demands a rejection of professionalized nursing itself, given nursing’s ongoing entanglements with oppressive regimes of capitalism, managerialism, and professionalism. The circumscribed epistemological and ontological bounds of professionalized nursing as a care practice cannot survive the expansive generosity of anarchism. Many nurse leaders physically cringe at the word “anarchy”, classifying it as dangerous and unprofessional, immediately lamenting the imagined horrors: Chaos! “People would die”, nurse leaders say, clutching their pearls. As if people are not already dying, have not been dying. This reaction is a failure to identify the horrors produced by the violent order imposed by capitalist healthcare systems. But it does not have to be this way. We are nurses whose hearts were broken by nursing in this healthcare system. Our tears nourished and cultivated a commitment to set out to do what we tried to in the first place: help people survive and leave the world a little better than we found it. Or at the very least, minimize the harm along the way. As the late-COVID-19 healthcare–industrial complex (HIC) gasps and wheezes through its dying breaths, nursing needs [r]evolution. In this paper, we set out to think about what nursing and care might look like after it all falls down, because it is all falling down. We invoke the image and ideas of nurse and anarchist Emma Goldman to imagine what nursing values would look like, embracing anarchist principles. We consider examples of community survival, mutual aid, and militant joy as strategies to achieve what nursing could be if nurses put an end to their cop shit, shrugging off their shroud of white cisheteropatriarchal femininity that manifests as professionalism and civility. We conclude with a call to action and a plan for skill-building because this can all be different. As we think through the unlikely pairing of nursing and anarchism, we start with a few words on nursing. Unlike many or most other things understood as universal, nursing is one of those things that most of us will experience in our lifetimes. For most reading this paper, that reality has likely already come to pass. Nursing is a relational care praxis that draws on art, care, science, and community to support wellbeing, health, and disease prevention, as well as care in illness [1] [2] . This kind of care happens everywhere and is…
