---
title: "The Communard Manifesto"
author: "Las Indias Cooperative Group"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/las-indias-cooperative-group-the-communard-manifesto"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 11 July 2017 from https://lasindias.blog/the-communard-manifesto-html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "las-indias-cooperative-group-the-communard-manifesto.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/las-indias-cooperative-group-the-communard-manifesto.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     The dilemma of our time        Abundance within reach        Inequality, unemployment and demoralization        What is decomposing is not only the economic system, but what the human experience means      Capitalism and its critics        Capitalism shaped the world because, before changing the State, it was able to create a new form of human experience        Revolutionaries that loved crises and large scales      La historia que no nos contaron        The new world will be born and affirmed inside the old        New relationships, here and now      Scale and scope        From the era of economies of scale…        …to the era of the inefficiencies of scale        Today, capital is too big for the real productive scale…        … and the optimal scale is approaching community dimensions      Building abundance here and now        Abundance has to do with production, not with consumption        A scarce product in a decentralized network is abundant in a distributed network        The “P2P mode of production” is the model for the production of abundance        The two faces of productivity        Artificially creating scarcity has become a way of life for over-scaled industry        Abundance is the magic that shines through the “hacker ethic”        El camino de la abundancia no pasa por producir menos        What will we do about the overuse of natural resources?        Connecting the dots      Conquer work, reconquer life        To be unable to access work is to be in social exile        There’s no self-realization without work        To conquer work is reconquer life      From adding to multiplying        The scene will be urban        The tasks of the communards        You are the protagonist      Appendix: concrete things you can do with this manifesto        Expand the conversation        Prepare to “make community” To the friends in the Club de las Indias, because we owe them the most valuable half of this manifesto. To the communards of all times, because their mistakes left us with the right questions. To the new communards across the whole world, because their enthusiasm brings us closer to the spirit of a time to come. Never before in History of humanity have technical capacities been as potent and accessible to common people as today. The massive development of the Internet through the ’90s profoundly changed ways of socializing, sharing, and working. Wealth was created in places that were socially and geographically peripheral by the hands of millions of small producers that, for the first time, could effectively access other markets and knowledge. In Asia alone, we saw hundreds of millions of people escape misery, more than in the rest of the history of humanity. As technological change became generational and social change, there appeared more and more environments of abundance, free goods, new forms of collaborative work and, above all, a new work ethic based on knowledge, the creation of goods, and “de-alienation.” The “hacker ethic,” as it was termed at the turn of the century, inspired the birth of first universal public good to be intentionally constructed by our species: free software, which, by itself, has meant a transfer of knowledge and technology greater than all developmental aid from rich countries. And, yet, not even the other great crisis of the last hundred years—the one that started with the “Crash of ’29″—created such discontent, such a dark spirit, and so much widespread pessimism. Neither admonitions nor hope work any longer to create attractive narratives. Well-being has ceased to be a credible expectation of analysts’ predictions or political parties’ options, whether old or new. All lines of contention have been shown to be futile for the common people. We’re entering a time in which no narrative can be believed if can’t demonstrate, here and now, that it successfully allows a new generation to develop and live decently through work. And, if anything has been really global over the la…
