---
title: "An Afro-Nihilist Manifesto"
author: "J.G.J"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/j-g-j-an-afro-nihilist-manifesto"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published by Little Black Cart. &lt;www.ananarchistcalledmutt.noblogs.org/post/2024/12/01/j-g-js-afro-nihilist-manifesto&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "j-g-j-an-afro-nihilist-manifesto.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/j-g-j-an-afro-nihilist-manifesto.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Now that THAT’s out of the way…        They say we can’t hate everybody,        [The simple mind does overgeneralize, but how many exceptions does it take to define the rule?]        Honest Work: Overture        [Shut the fuck up, bruh. I’m good on it...]        Worthless / Without a Master (Belial)        #NotAllAncestors        [Put up with Pet-Life, or be put to sleep]        Honest Work — “Ballet”        A lil’ ditty ‘bout Abuse by J.”g.”J.        I Bought That Box from “Hellraiser” at a Sliding-Scale YardSale Fundraiser for Reparations!        “Love it or Leave it (Alone)”        Say no to drugs!        Ode to the Owed        Help Meeeeeeeee! (Whiteflies)        Paid only in bad faith        Honest Work: The Third Annual Report        “No Sir, I won’t” (tentatively)        “El Patron (Second) Waves Goodbye” by Cop Exclusionary Radical Feminist        The Best Men Lie Under the Earth by Comrade Duc de Blangis        Domestic Supply of Newborn Porn (Slug Bait) I am NEVER a fucking “African-American”! I am NOT “half-Black.” I am a mulatto, but I am ALWAYS Black. I am, sometimes, a Negro. I am usually a nigger... I am usually a “nigger.” I am usually a n**ger. I am usually an (”)N-word(”). This compendium is in memorium of my brother, Chris Monfort. Though he might not fuck with a lot of this, he would die for my “right” to write it. Plus, he’d appreciate that I “had the balls” to do so… I dedicate this to Franklin “Hogg” Hargus (and his cocksucker). Thank you both for the wisdom and inspiration… An AfroNihilists Libation… I play the Sims, but only Cleo, cuz I wanna set it off... or do the right thing like Mookie and Smiley. I wanna pirate, like a Somali, On the wide Sargasso sea and free every Sally Hemmings. Squat like Ellison’s pre-”Ex-Worker” and be too “G” to need even a name… I am a sick nigga, I am a spiteful nigga, an unpleasing nigger. No more balling like a quadroon, This mulatto is bringing tragedy like a mix of Bigger Thomas and Val Solanis Lighting up August worse than Joe Christmas, in way to put Jimmy Governor to shame… If only other edgelords (of ego addiction and ought-istic affliction) would listen to Zami’s biomythography in lieu of playing into horseshoe theory with hand grenades! I, too, sought the wild by way of the rational Mama “Bone Black” bell may be the diagnostician of their dissonant cognition but Dr. Frantz Fanon deposed Francois de Sade and can cure the caucazoid infection... A daywalking vampire with descent of both Yakub and Khmet my “Immersion-Emersion” should be icy and bloody avenging Saartjie Baartman as would Saidiya Hartman if she, and Wilderson Three, had resisted domestication... Eshu, help me eschew my melanincholia! Let shattered museum glass be my cast cowries... Make me the “abasom” of the Ewe. Dumpster-diving at Akodessewa An ancient adze finds my hand, and I go from Gongoli to Kakuungu (witch doctoring my own Nguzo Sab-bath I take things apart like Okonkwo) So, for Benin and Togo, I do the whole Voodoo Doughnuts crew Like Washington in Waco, circa 1916, They should have asked Ogun about irony, because immolation is the sincerest form of flattery. Shango Unchained is playing in my brain Like Mancala between Marighella and Gerima “Tarantino in the Congo” will be shot, guerilla-style... Shanghai-ed, Dago Dubya Griffith will die in a Coltan mine and the card attached would say “dead wigger storage.” Kunta the hack’s foot off, wrap it in kente cloth, A fetish object fashioned for every Lupita Nyong’o to ward off all the rapey Weinsteins and that one wop hipster (“in ten-thousand”)... May Anarcha’s pain come to Spokane No anesthetic for she of the NAACP since Blackness is but an aesthetic... Dolezal will get paid the same as Korryn Gaines, with a speculum (to take Amadou’s name out her mouth)... Even in a cage, no book deals or box-braids, she’d have Hughes’ poetry and Mandingo fantasies I’d rather kill this mockingbird... She sings too fucking much. My Maafa legacy is reverse m…
