---
title: "Anarchism, Syndicalism and Workers Councils"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-anarchism-syndicalism-and-workers-councils"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 24th April 2021 from anarchism.pageabode.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarcho-anarchism-syndicalism-and-workers-councils.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-anarchism-syndicalism-and-workers-councils.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Laying the Foundations: Pierre-Joseph Proudhon          “Universal Association”          Why not the State?          Confessions of a Statesman        Association internationale des travailleurs          Mutualists and Collectivists        Revolutionary Anarchism: Michael Bakunin          The Paris Commune          The Federalist International        The Spirit of Revolt: Peter Kropotkin        “The Chicago Idea”        The Rise of Syndicalism        Russian Revolution, 1905        Russian Revolution, 1917          The Fate of the Revolution          A lesson for the world?          “how not to introduce communism”        Conclusions This is a write-up of a talk I gave in Edinburgh in April 2019 on anarchist ideas on social change and organisation. I have used the slides I created for the talk as the basis of this write-up, although as usual I am sure this is not the same as what was said on the night but close enough. Hopefully this talk gives a useful summary of anarchist ideas on organisation and their development from the birth of anarchism to around 1920. First, thank you for coming. As you know, this talk was advertised as follows: We know what anarchists are against: capitalism and the State. We know what anarchists are for: libertarian socialism. But how to get from one to the other, by means compatible with the ends? Anarchy is organisation, organisation, organisation. Here I was sketch the origins of anarchist support for workers’ councils – a new form of socialist democracy based on elected, mandated and recallable delegates in both the social and economic spheres. This will involve discussing various anarchist thinkers along with key organisations – primarily the First International – and events – such as the Paris Commune and the Russian Revolutions. While some like to portray anarchism as dating back many centuries, this I think misunderstands both its origins and nature. Yes, before 1840 many thinkers and movements had ideas which can be described as anarchist. This is to be expected, for it would be staggering if those subjected to the evils produced by the state and property would not conclude the need to get rid of both and act accordingly. However, as a named socio-economic theory anarchism dates from the 1840s and the works of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, the first person to self-identify as an anarchist. This is where we must start to be historically accurate – for earlier movements can now respectively be claimed as anarchist (although a few were attacked as such by their enemies!) because of Proudhon and that part of the labour and socialist movement he helped to create. Not, of course, that he was an isolated intellectual for he was a worker who took an active part in the socialist movement, with a mutual influence and interaction. So what is anarchism? These comments from an unpublished 1847 manuscript by Proudhon summarise its basics well: “We want legislation of the people by the people, without representatives; “government of the people by the people, without that supernatural person called the prince or the state; “industrial centralisation, administrative, without hierarchy; “guarding of the people by the people, without any other army than a citizen militia; “justice of the people by the people, without unremovable magistrates; “education of the people by the people without university monopolies and without Jesuits; “finally we want the organisation of labour by the workers, without capitalists or masters” While some of the terminology changed – most obviously, the use of “federalism” to better describe the idea of an “administrative, without hierarchy” centralisation – the vision remains the foundations of both Proudhon’s anarchism and subsequent forms. In What is Property? , Proudhon called his aim the “universal association” and association – “the organisation of labour by the workers, without capitalists or masters” – remained a key aspect of his ideas and those who followed him. Thus we di…
