---
title: "Early Days"
author: "Leo Tolstoy"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-early-days"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Nathan Haskell Dole Retrieved on 9th June 2021 from en.wikisource.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "leo-tolstoy-early-days.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-early-days.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       CHAPTER I. THE OLD HORSE        CHAPTER II. HOW I WAS TAUGHT TO RIDE HORSEBACK WE had an old, old man, Pimen Timofeitch. He was ninety years of age. He lived at his grand- son’s house, but did no work. His back was bent ; he walked with a stick, and found it hard to drag one leg after the other. All of his teeth were gone ; his face was wrinkled ; his lower lip trembled. When he walked and when he talked, he had no control over his lips, so that it was impossible to make out what he was saying. There were four brothers of us, and we all liked to ride horseback ; but we had no gentle horses fit for us to ride. We were permitted to ride only on one old horse whose name was Voronok. [1] One time mother gave us permission to have a ride, and we all ran with our tutor to the stables. The coach- man saddled Voronok for us, and the first to ride was our eldest brother. He took a long ride ; he rode over to the threshing- floor and around the park, and when he came back, we shouted : “ Now start him up ! ” Our eldest brother began to kick Voronok, and to strike him with his whip, and Voronok galloped past us. After our eldest brother had ridden, the next oldest took his turn. He also had a long ride, and whipped Voronok till he galloped down the hill. He wanted to ride even longer, but the third brother begged him to give him a chance as soon as possible. The third brother also rode over to the threshing-floor and around the park, and then along through the village, and then he came galloping down the hill toward the stable. When he rode up to us, Voronok was winded, and his neck and flanks were black with sweat. When my turn came, I wanted to surprise my brothers, and show them how well I could ride, an-d I began to spur him on to his utmost speed ; but Voronok would not stir from the stable. In spite of my redoubled blows he would not gallop, but only shied and backed. I grew angry with the horse, and pounded him with all my might with my whip and legs. I tried lashing him in the places where he was tenderest ; I broke the whip, and with the broken handle I began to pound him on the head. But still Voronok would not budge. Then I turned around, rode up to our tutor, and asked him for a heavier whip. But the tutor said to me : “ You have ridden him enough, sir ; come down. Why torture the horse ? ” I was vexed, and said : “ Why ? I have not ridden him at all ! Look how I will make him gallop ! Please give me a stronger whip ! I will warm him up ! ” Then the tutor shook his head, and said : “ Ah, sir ! you have no mercy. Why warm him up ? Just think ! He is twenty years old. The horse is tired out ; he is all winded ; yes, and he is so old ! Just think how old he is ! It is just as if it were Pimen Timofe’ftch. If you should mount on Timofeitch, and should whip hirr with all your might, say, now, would not that be a pity ? ” I knew well about Pimen, and I obeyed the tutor. I dismounted from the horse, and when I saw how he was laboring with his sweaty sides, and was puffing with his nostrils, and was switching his thin tail, then I realized how cruel we had been to the horse. But till that time I had supposed that the horse enjoyed it as much as I did. I became so sorry for Voronok that I began to caress his sweaty neck, and to ask his forgiveness for the beat- ing that I had given him. Since that time I have grown older, and I still always pity horses, and I always remember Voronok and Pimen Timofeitch when I see any one abusing a horse. WHEN I was a little boy, we four brothers had our lessons every day except Sundays and holidays, when we were free and could play together. One time father said : “You older children must learn to ride horseback; you must be sent to riding-school.” I was the youngest, and I asked : “ Can’t I learn, too ? ” My father said : “ You would tumble off.” I began to tease him to let me learn, too, and I almost cried. My father said : “Very well, then, you shall take lessons, too. Only see here : don’t…
