---
title: "Disobedience: The antidote for miserablism"
author: "Penelope Rosemont"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/penelope-rosemont-disobedience-the-antidote-for-miserablism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "It’s our world; let’s take it!"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "penelope-rosemont-disobedience-the-antidote-for-miserablism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/penelope-rosemont-disobedience-the-antidote-for-miserablism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

“Disobedience, in the eyes of anyone who has read history, is man’s original virtue.” — Oscar Wilde “...and then we go out and seize a square of singular symbolic significance and put our asses on the line to make it happen. The time has come to deploy this emerging stratagem against the greatest corrupter of our democracy: Wall Street, the financial Gomorrah of America.” — From Adbusters (September/October 2011 issue) “We are not protesting. Who is there to protest to? What could we ask them for that they could grant? We are occupying. We are reclaiming those same spaces of public practice that have been commoded, privatized and locked into the hands of faceless bureaucracy, real estate portfolios and police ‘protection.’ Hold on to these spaces, nurture them and let the boundaries of your occupations grow.” — Egyptian (Tahrir Square) Comrades Unemployed, depressed, don’t know what to do next? WORK FULL-TIME! Men and women needed NOW to work on Occupy Everything! No pay; possible great future. Guaranteed: Enormous satisfaction right now! Make your Unemployment meaningful. Take the world apart and remold it to your desires. Don’t gamble in casinos for petty stakes, don’t waste your nickels and dimes. Gamble big! You have a world to win! Work as we have known it is gone! For better or for worse, the workless future is here; right now. And, it must be reckoned with. Don’t ask for jobs, don’t be lonesome for your exploitation; don’t miss your cage, or your alarm clock. Demand instead that everyone gets an equal share; demand ownership of the products that you make, the world that you create. Demand the natural world be restored...a beauty for us now to enjoy and a way to sustain us in the future. Jacques Vache, one of those World War I rebels who, with Andre Breton, was at the root of surrealism, considered the role of the Alarm-Clock in daily-life-that materialized superego lurking in every household. The Alarm Clock, he wrote, “a monster that has always frightened me because of the regimentation glaring from its face, because of the way it — this honest man — glares at me when I enter the bedroom.” It is, “a hypocrite that detests me.” Franklin Rosemont, co-founder of the Chicago Surrealist Group, commented that the alarm/time clock is “at the very center of the class struggle...scientific management...multiplied profits and the power of the giant trusts.” He then asks, “When will the last ten-thousand alarm-clocks be tossed on a bonfire of the last ten-million time cards?” A good time would be now. “Human dignity has been reduced to the level of exchange value,” wrote Surrealist Andre Breton. “We do not accept the laws of economy and exchange, we do not accept enslavement to work.” Occupy Wall Street (OWS), we need to note, is the precariat-those who face an uncertain future-manifesting not as the “unemployed,” as defined by pointless policy makers, but as humanity in search of its dignity. The critique of work and the consideration of new possibilities for everyday life began in the 1880s when Paul Lafargue, Karl Marx’s son-in-law, wrote an amazing book, The Right to Be Lazy. It was the first to recognize a disastrous dogma, “A strange delusion possesses the working classes of the nations where capitalist civilization holds its sway...[T]his delusion is the love of work, the furious passion for work, pushed even to the exhaustion of the vital force of the individual and his progeny. Instead of opposing this mental aberration, the priests, the economists and the moralists have cast a sacred halo over work...” This year, The Right to Be Lazy has come back into print at the precisely right moment with an excellent introduction by Bernard Marszalek, a Fifth Estate contributor in this issue. In his introduction, Marszalek writes, “The Right to be Lazy, after decades of obscurity, was reprinted by Solidarity Bookshop in the 60’s, at a time when academics, hippies and revolutionaries questioned the future of work.” At that time, he …
