---
title: "A Critique of Filial Piety and the Traditional East Asian Family Model"
author: "Liao"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/liao-a-critique-of-filial-piety-and-the-traditional-east-asian-family-model"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 17 April 2025 from &lt;thecommoner.org.uk/a-critique-of-filial-piety-and-the-traditional-east-asian-family-model&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "liao-a-critique-of-filial-piety-and-the-traditional-east-asian-family-model.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/liao-a-critique-of-filial-piety-and-the-traditional-east-asian-family-model.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Historical Context        Critiques of Filial Piety’s Effects Upon the Individual        Critiques of Filial Piety’s Effects on Society        Concluding Thoughts This piece is a continuation of a series of articles that seek to articulate Asian anarchism. To briefly reiterate, Asian anarchism aims to unite Asian and Asian diasporic thought under a lens of anti-hierarchical analysis as we look toward a liberatory future. As Asia is extremely diverse, there will be a plurality of viewpoints, and as a Chinese-Taiwanese writer, I am best suited to examine and critique the cultures that I know best. Additionally, this piece was written in tandem with a conversation between myself and another Chinese comrade, whose words are paraphrased in various places within the text. However, I would invite any Asian anarchist to give their own critiques and thoughts regarding the hierarchies within their own cultures. Hierarchies permeate every society, and despite being thought of as natural, the reality is that hierarchical relations are taught and ingrained into us at a young age by the cultures that surround us. While anarchist critiques of the family model are quite extensive, I will be focusing on a core concept in the historical and present Chinese familial model and an alternative horizontal conception as a replacement. The basis of Chinese culture is heavily influenced by Confucianism and as a result, the concept of xiao (filial piety) is fundamental in placing hierarchy at the core of the Chinese family model. However, we first must understand what filial piety is and how it has evolved as a concept of social control throughout Chinese history. Filial piety is an underlying concept within Confucianism that served as the foundation for both individual and societal harmony. Originally, it meant the unwavering obedience of a child to a parental figure, given that the parental figure is fulfilling their responsibilities and duties as a parent. The intention behind this concept was for children to treat their parents well, and vice versa. Especially, as in the time of Confucius, it was common for the parents and children of the aristocratic class to commit murders and other atrocities upon one another. This can be best seen in Analects 2.5. Meng Yi asked what filial piety was. The Master said, “It is not being disobedient.” Soon after, as Fan Chi was driving him, the Master told him, saying, “Meng-sun asked me what filial piety was, and I answered him, — ‘not being disobedient.’” Fan Chi said, “What did you mean?” The Master replied, “That parents, when alive, be served according to propriety; that, when dead, they should be buried according to propriety; and that they should be sacrificed to according to propriety.” The key phrase here, is that parents should be served according to propriety. This is indicative of the fact that filial piety was not originally intended to be used as a tool for parents to command their children however they want. However, they were only constrained by propriety, essentially the conventional social norms dictated by traditional ritualistic customs and behavior. This meant that parents could command their children to do essentially anything that fits within the social norms. These commands were to be regarded as essentially unconditional, with the child being forced to obey the parent as rebellion and defiance were seen as unacceptable within Confucian ethics. Additionally, as Neo-Confucianism came into being, it demolished the idea of “according to propriety” altogether and replaced it with total obedience, no matter the circumstance, to the parents, which is the form of filial piety that is most familiar to East Asians and Chinese people of today. The roles of parent and child within Confucianism were rigid and firmly placed the former as a superior and the latter as a subordinate. This is largely tied to the Confuscianist concept of the rectification of names and the five basic relationships in lif…
