---
title: "64th FdCA Council of Delegates"
author: "Federazione dei Comunisti Anarchici"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federazione-dei-comunisti-anarchici-64th-fdca-council-of-delegates"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Final Document"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "federazione-dei-comunisti-anarchici-64th-fdca-council-of-delegates.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/federazione-dei-comunisti-anarchici-64th-fdca-council-of-delegates.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1. The appearance of a “normal” country        2. FdCA tactics for 2007        3. Syndicalism        4. Secularism        5. Environment/energy        6. Immigration        7. Anti-Militarism        8. Anti-Fascism        9. Libertarian practices and politics Following the approval of the 2007 Budget the centre-left government appears to be more stable and therefore better able to overcome certain internal contradictions and face the coming challenges: pension reform and the success of its plans to put workers’ severance pay into funds; labour contract reform; flexibility as a cure for precarity; assimilation and regularization of the new Eastern European immigrant workforce and “model” temporary detention centres (CPTs) for migrants; completion of “European” infrastructural work (TAV, various corridors, etc.); new national energy plan (gas/regasification, etc.); confirmation of Italian military presence abroad; plan to liberalize and privatize strategic sectors; liberalization plans in commercial services as a laughable form of support for demand. After its adventures in government, the parliamentary opposition of the centre-right seems to be in a phase of re-organization in the light of the UDC (Union of Christian and Centrist Democrats) distancing itself from the coalition and the dangerous nostalgia of the Northern League movement. However, their objective of fiscal federalism is still within reach. The industrialists’ federation, Confindustria, is more than satisfied with the 2007 Budget and will be working with the government on the task of contract reform (preference for de-centralized contracts with gradual abandoning of national labour contracts) and a return to control over working hours and rhythms as a condition for wage talks. With the entry into government of a large part of the political forces and union class who were previously active in the opposition to Berlusconi, the movements have lost a good deal of momentum and social opposition has been somewhat diminished. There remain — for now at least — only sporadic outbursts within the labour movement and on the social level, such as the FIOM (engineering workers’ union, part of the CGIL), the 28 April Network (opposition within the CGIL union federation), some grassroots unions, attempts to reorganize opposition on questions such as energy/environment, secularism, immigrants, precarity and neo-fascism. In light of the situation, the difficult task for anarchist communists is: to represent an organizational and political reference point for the many grassroots militants who remain isolated and disoriented as a result of the withering of the movements and the recruiting to Prodi’s increasingly neo-liberal stance of that sector of the political and labour world that until recently opposed the liberalism of the centre-right; to promote at community level political initiatives both as FdCA and as part of grassroots associations, networks and alliances of political, labour and social forces in areas such as labour struggles, secularism, the environment/energy, immigration, anti-militarism and anti-fascism. Support the creation of committees in the battle for the protection of state pensions, against pension reform, acting on a double level of technical counter-information in the workplace and the search for ways to restore national insurance schemes. Support for committees and initiatives against precarity. Support for the current policies of the FIOM and the 28 April Network. Support for attempts to create a more united grassroots syndicalism (such as the recent creation of the SdL-Workers’ Union) and dialogue within and between categories. Given the recent rise in clerical intrusion into the lives of people, it is necessary to support the initiatives of movements, committees and individuals in order to protect the individual’s rights to choose one’s partner and to make a living will. Denouncing of and counter-information on the liberalization processes curren…
