---
title: "Destroy All Monsters"
author: "Rene Farben"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rene-ffarben-destroy-all-monsters"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Complete Guide for Children"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rene-ffarben-destroy-all-monsters.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rene-ffarben-destroy-all-monsters.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       INTRODUCTION        CHAPTER ONE        CHAPTER TWO        CHAPTER THREE        CHAPTER FOUR “One of the oldest, most rigid, and seemingly instinctual thought-patterns is the figure of the monster. Instilled in us since childhood, the Monster has imprinted a fearful image so compelling, so deeply buried in our consciousness that we're at once deeply moved by it and rarely aware of its power over us. This children's DIY guide offers some methods for DESTROYING THEM. This new edition, dredged up from sedimented depths at least twice, René Farben's Destroy All Monsters is perfect nighttime reading.” - ENEMY COMBATANT PUBLICATIONS Monsters do exist. Sometimes they disguise themselves as piles of filthy laundry huddled in the corner of your bedroom or as dancing shadows cast by the overhanging tree that brushes against your window pane, but do not be fooled. Those noises that can easily be explained away by rational men are in fact Monsters. For Monsters have many allies, take on many deceptive disguises, and have paid out many high-priced bribes just so they can eat you right up. Even if they are unable to get to you tonight, Monsters are extremely patient and they will wait. Hiding under your bed, drooling and gnashing their terrible teeth. They will crowd into your closet, scraping their claws on the back of the door, their bellies growling. They will creep about in the hall outside your bedroom, twiddling their tendrils just to pass the time. They may even be hanging from inside the lamp shade, thinking about how juicy you might taste. Monsters are out there, waiting for you to fall asleep or make some terrible mistake which would allow them to pounce on you, devouring you whole and picking between their fangs with your tiny white bones. Your parents might inform you in various convincing tones, that Monsters are just a "figment of your imagination" or that "there are no such creatures as Monsters". But, no matter how reassuring your parents might sound, do not ever believe them, for if they dare to tell you these things, they more than likely are collaborating with the Monsters to get rid of you. After all, children such as yourself, are a horrible bother, always making noise, needing to be fed, and constantly asking all sorts of questions. They probably figured out, with you out of the picture, their lives might be normal and trouble-free the way it used to be before you plopped out. So your parents, if they say these dastardly lies to you, are working with the Monsters to get rid of you once and for all. YOU ARE ON YOUR OWN! Well, a very long time ago, children were allowed to run and play all day long. No one told them they could not climb on rocks or open all the closed doors or lay on the grass just looking up at the clouds. No one felt the need to dress the children up or force them to listen to cranky grown-up lectures or attend school or even sit still and be quiet. Children were free to do as they pleased. Then one afternoon, something terrible happened. The Monsters, dressed in suits and ties smelling of perfume and too much wit, invaded from the West. The Monsters brought with them promises for the grown-ups and horrible plans for the children. The promises promised to the grown-ups were rather silly and made life a whole lot worse for everyone involved, even though the grown-ups will definitely tell you otherwise. The promises all dealt with the accumulation of great wealth, easier jobs, and security from evils that no one dare discuss. The grown-ups were now to be known as "Adults" with certain rights and privileges; such as having to go to work at certain times each day, doing the same job every day, and being allowed to tell certain other grown-ups, as well as ALL children, what they should or should not be doing with their time. As for the children, the Monsters made them stop playing all day by telling the grown-ups that such things were not the things that "proper" or "polite" children do. What the chil…
