---
title: "Dispatches from Khartoum"
author: "Sudanese Anarchists Gathering"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sudanese-anarchists-gathering-dispatches-from-khartoum"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published by Organize Magazine Retrieved on Feb 23 2025 from https://www.anarchistfederation.net/sudanese-anarchist-gathering-dispatches-from-khartoum/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sudanese-anarchists-gathering-dispatches-from-khartoum.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sudanese-anarchists-gathering-dispatches-from-khartoum.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Dispatch From Khartoum #1        Dispatch From Khartoum #2          February 7 th          February 21 st          February 22 nd        Dispatch From Khartoum #3        Dispatch From Khartoum #4        Dispatch From Khartoum #5          April 24 th        Dispatch From Khartoum #6        Dispatch From Khartoum #7        Dispatch From Khartoum #8        Dispatch from Khartoum #9        Dispatch from Khartoum #10          Thursday 13 th          Saturday 15 th — Morning          Saturday 15 th — Evening          Sunday 16 th          Monday 17 th        WHAT CAN YOU DO IN SOLIDARITY WITH THE PEOPLE OF SUDAN? To our anarchist comrades, a short note on what happened in the demonstrations of January 17. There were violations and (tactics of) excessive repression practiced by the government forces against the defenseless peaceful revolutionaries. This led to the martyrdom of 7 revolutionaries in the center of the capital, Khartoum, and serious injuries from the use of live ammunition. The people decided to take control of the capital, Khartoum, and all the cities of Sudan, and to declare comprehensive civil disobedience as of today, January 18, 2022. Now and until this moment the revolutionaries control all the streets with checkpoints. The security forces appear and disappear from time to time to practice their excessive suppression of the revolutionaries, but despite this, the revolutionaries are in a stabile state and the streets remain closed by their orders and the revolutionary system. A.C.A.B Sudanese Anarchists Gathering The demonstration did not witness the martyrdom of any of the rebels. There’s just been some injuries, and they’re all stable. The central demonstrations that bring together Khartoum Bahri, Omderman and Khartoum city will be in one place, central Khartoum, on February 14. Processions in the three cities of the capital One martyr (8-year-old boy) was ran over by a bus driven by a citizen in Tress next to the Amsiti lounge in Berri, Khartoum, which led to his immediate martyrdom. More than 200 injured in Khartoum, 87 injuries (hospitalized). Of these, 20 were hit by tear gas canisters, 12 in the head and 3 must be transferred to specialized hospitals. One comrade has got shrapnel from a sound bomb (Ed. Flash Bang Device?) in the eye. He was transferred to a specialty hospital. A man was injured when he was run over by police and a child suffered a broken rib due to a stampede. The rest are in stable conditions and thank God. In Omdurman, 33 injuries (confined to us and hospitalized). Of these, 16 were injured by tear gas canisters in various parts of the body (head/chest and leg). 10 in the head. One person got a rubber bullet in the legs. He’s got splinters from a sound bomb in the left hand. 5 injured were brutally beaten, all of them and the rest are in stable condition, thank God. 67 were injured people in the city of Bahri were able to reach the hospital in addition to dozens who were rescued on the ground, 2 with gunshots. The first in the hand, breaking 3 fingers and shattering the bones. The second was shot twice in the left leg and right arm. 6 of the injured were ran over by Thatchers (Ed. militarised pick-ups) belonging to the coup d’ tat. The first is a child who was ranover, causing multiple injuries, and he’s going to need to see aspecialty hospital, no fractures, thank God. The second was ran overcausing sporadic injuries to many parts of his body, no fractures,thank God. The third child was ran over, causing chest, head and legsinjuries. No fractures, thank God. He was sent to hospital to be andwill need to be seen by a brain specialist. Of the remaining 3 whowere ran over (one by a digger), one suffered a broken neck and ahead injury and will also need to be seen by a brain specialist. A large number of detainees have been released due to the continuous pressure of the daily demonstrations on the government. The government’s financial treasury has gone bankrupt and they are now about t…
