---
title: "Does the Bible teach anarchism?"
author: "Ted Grimsrud"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ted-grimsrud-does-the-bible-teach-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on April 26, 2025 from https://thinkingpacifism.net/2014/08/25/does-the-bible-teach-anarchism/#:~:text=The%20exodus%20story%20tells%20of,not%20structural%20kind%20of%20authority."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ted-grimsrud-does-the-bible-teach-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ted-grimsrud-does-the-bible-teach-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anarchism and the Bible        Starting with Genesis        The politics of the exodus and Torah        Being established in the land        The demise of the kingdom—and what follows        The politics of Jesus I first learned about anarchism back in the 1970s. My wife Kathleen and I got involved with an activist group opposed to Jimmy Carter’s decision to reinstate registration for the draft in order to “show resolve” to the Soviet Union (this is one of the darker aspects of Carter’s presidential legacy—a cynical but failed attempt to hold off the political threat from the right that remains thirty-some years later an important element in the socialization of young people into our national security state). We met a young couple, Karl and Linda, who had just moved to our hometown, Eugene, Oregon, to be part of the rising anarchist movement there. I had typical superficial stereotypes of anarchists as mindless terrorists (it was an “anarchist,” after all, who had shot President McKinley). I was disabused of that superficial antipathy in conversations with Karl and Linda and also in seeing their lives. They were compassionate, committed to social justice, and (Linda, at least) thoroughly nonviolent. They were pretty negative about Christianity, but were interested to learn to know about our Anabaptist convictions. About the same time, I took a class on the history of political theory at the University of Oregon—and the professor treated anarchism as a serious political philosophy that needed to be considered alongside the other more mainstream approaches. It might have been as part of that class the I read George Woodcock’s fascinating book, Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . I have not traveled very far down the anarchist path in these past decades, but I have remained interested in and sympathetic toward this political orientation. Writers such as James C. Scott, Noam Chomsky, and Rebecca Solnit, whose anarchistically-inclined books I have read for reasons other than direct articulation of anarchism, have kept my interest alive. And then, when I learned about the Jesus Radicals website and movement, I started to realize that there was some genuine compatibility between the evolving political perspective I have been constructing and at some articulations of anarchism. One of the new ideas for me has been to think that perhaps we could say that anarchistic sensibilities (in our present day sense of what those involve) are embedded in the biblical story from start to finish. I want in this post to begin to sketch an argument to support this idea. For the sake of this conversation, let’s define “anarchism” as (1) the belief in living without a centralized state and (2) the belief in organizing society on a voluntary, cooperative basis without recourse to force or compulsion. The term “anarchism” for a political philosophy based on these ideas only arose sometime during the 19 th century. It has gotten a pretty negative reputation because of being associated with revolutionary violence in the service of actually overthrowing the state. However, many of anarchism’s most important thinkers, while not as a rule thoroughgoing pacifists, have not been advocates of widespread violence. Because of anarchism’s recent emergence as a discrete political theology, it would be highly anachronistic to see the Bible as overtly teaching it. However, my sense is that if we use a looser definition of anarchism and focus on the positive—a view of political life that is not state centered and that understands human life as best organized in decentralized, non-coercive ways—we might be able to discern anarchistic tendencies in the Bible. At least this is my hypothesis. To begin to test the hypothesis, I will simply list a number of biblical themes that support the idea that the Bible’s politics has quite a bit in common with at least some elements of anarchist thought. I will focus on the general storyline of the Bible m…
