---
title: "An Aromantic Manifesto"
author: "yingchen and yingtong"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yingchen-and-yingtong-an-aromantic-manifesto"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Transcription provided by the authors. https://aromanticmanifesto.tumblr.com/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yingchen-and-yingtong-an-aromantic-manifesto.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yingchen-and-yingtong-an-aromantic-manifesto.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Our Manifesto        The Freedom to Love        The Privatisation of Love        The Hierarchisation of Love        Turning Inwards        Aromanticism as Queer Counterpublic        Vision of a Different Future “The here and now is a prison house. We must strive, in the face of the here and now’s totalizing rendering of reality, to think and feel a then and there … Queerness is that thing that lets us feel that this world is not enough, that indeed something is missing.” — José Esteban Muñoz, Cruising Utopia “I want a world where friendship is appreciated as a form of romance… I want a world where our worth isn’t linked to our desireability, our security to our monogamy, our family to our biology.” — Alok Vaid-Menon Romance is inherently queerphobic The organisation of queerness around the celebration and pursuit of romantic desires and pleasures reinforces queer oppression Queer liberation must abolish romance as its long-term goal A recent study of the dating preferences of 960 people (942 cis) found that: 88% of respondents refused to date trans people 89% of gay men refused to date trans men 82% of gay women refused to date trans women 63% of bisexual/queer people refused to date trans women; 51% refused to date trans men Despite the queer celebration of the “freedom to love,” most trans people are excluded from romance based on their gender even within the queer community, before other forms of marginalization like race, class, and ability have been considered—let alone the cis-heterosexual notion of romantic fit in terms of “personality.” Only two respondents indicated a lack of interest in romance. Most queer people want to date. Queerness itself, we assume, wants to date. For many queer people, same-gender intimacies are queer because they are unabashedly romantic in a world that insists on keeping romance between a cis-man and cis-woman. The modern queer movement has organised itself around the rhetoric of “freedom to love”: particularly the recognition of gay marriage and other queer romances. But “freedom to love” within a hierarchical structure of desire replicates that very hierarchy. Many are loved only violently, fetishised as objects without complex needs of their own. Many remain unloved and unwanted. Staunchly defending the idea that people “can’t help who they love” (or not), the queer movement has often inhibited an interrogation of the heteronormative power structures governing all desire. If straight people can’t help who they love, then neither can gay people. Nor, one might suppose, racists and transphobes, and people who find disability and fatness unattractive. Queer oppression is not just the experience of prohibited desire. It is also the experience of hierarchical and violent desire . It is also the experience of undesirability . Although often constructed otherwise, romance is not a “natural” feeling people have for each other. It is first and foremost a political system: Romance only gains intelligibility within the (neo)liberal dichotomisation between public and private life. Public life concerns the interests of people as citizens and is regarded as a legitimate sphere of social intervention. Private life concerns the interests of people as consumers/individuals and is nobody’s business but those privately involved. While the domestic sphere fashioned by heterosexual kinship relations has been historically designated as private life, queer intimacies have instead been regarded as a matter of public concern due to moral panics associating them with predation and perversion throughout history. In response, the queer movement has fought to privatise of queer intimacies through the normalisation of queer romance. But privatisation in our political system doesn’t mean something is no longer an object of public intervention. Rather, the public-private dichotomy designates what kinds of interventions are permissible and what aren’t. Romance has an undeniably public character: it wouldn’t be hal…
