---
title: "Against the Production Ethic"
author: "Ignatius"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-against-the-production-ethic"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "and the States and Bosses who wield it"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-against-the-production-ethic.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-against-the-production-ethic.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What is the Production Ethic?        Foundations and Consequences          Ableism          Colonization          Dehumanization and Alienation          Punishment        “Communism” with Capitalistic Characteristics        Anti-Work Thought as Attack This is for those who are tired of the exhaustion enforced on them by an unfeeling, uncaring world. This is for those who cry out in the night for respite knowing they must rise in the morning to put food on their table. This is for those who are told they are unworthy of care, of support, told that their life is a necessary sacrifice. This is for those taken from us too soon, for too long. This is for those who refuse to be made stone in defiance of this world, who yearn for something more. This is for all those who fight back. I see you. This is for you. It is February 2022. The US has now entered its third calendar year of being ravaged by a global pandemic. 3,579 people died yesterday in the US alone. These lives were not lost through some tragic accident as nearly all media coverage would lead us to believe. No, these lives were taken, sacrificed by those with power who stood to gain from the pandemic. Sacrificed in service of the production ethic. Even when actions are taken with the ostensible goal of curbing mass death, the framing of those actions is rarely about prioritizing people’s health. Instead, the actions are taken to “help us get back to normal” as soon as possible, to get us back to producing. How else could Bezos increase his net worth by over $50,000,000,000 since January 2020, or Musk increase his by over $100,000,000,000 in the same time. In this perpetual “return to normalcy” we have seen a massive number of people quitting their jobs, refusing to put up with the conditions that have been imposed upon this world since the advent of capitalism, and the chattel slavery and colonization that served it; heightened and highlighted by the pandemic. This zine does not attempt to offer an explanation of why people are quitting their jobs now, or even posit the meaning of this current situation. There are as many reasons to refuse work as there are people. We are not yet two years removed from a sustained Black rebellion that demonstrated the meaning of possibility in a torched cop shop and a thousand other daring acts across the country. I have no desire to explain that which intentionally evades characterization. No desire to paint a collection of moments as a prescriptive movement. This intro is only to serve as context for the world in which I am writing, the world I wish to make dust. The world dominated by the production ethic. The production ethic is the system of value by which actions that are deemed to be “productive” are considered good, and those that are either neutral or deemed “unproductive” are considered bad. Similarly, individuals who exhibit “productive” behaviors are considered to be good, and those who are “unproductive” are considered bad. The value of a person comes to be defined by their alleged productivity. This ethic is a consequence of, or response to, the capitalist mode of production. This ethic is intentionally constructed, propagated, and enforced by those who stand to gain from the capitalist mode of production in order to reinforce their power. Individuals who are considered productive are considered deserving of being rewarded; socially, financially, spiritually. Those who are considered unproductive are deserve to be punished. This system permeates all aspects of our lives. It not only affects us where we work, but it is first beaten into us (either metaphorically or far too often literally) at school and within our own families. We internalize the ethic to cling to existence within this meatgrinder of a system and so the ethic infects our relationships with others, with space and time, and with ourselves. Anyone who has ever worked a service job and had their boss get pissed at them for taking too long of a smoke break or…
