---
title: "Greetings from Sweden"
author: "Rasmus Hästbacka"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rasmus-hastbacka-greetings-from-sweden"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A dual-track syndicalism?"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rasmus-hastbacka-greetings-from-sweden.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rasmus-hastbacka-greetings-from-sweden.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In 2022, the Swedish syndicalist union SAC holds a congress. Some say that SAC is at a crossroads. But what exactly are the choices? In the following essay, Rasmus Hästbacka argues that the choice is between building a popular movement union or a “revolutionary” cadre union. Hästbacka believes in a popular movement that progresses on dual tracks, i.e. a movement that builds both syndicalist sections and cross-union cohesion among workers. The Swedish labor market has recently been highlighted in Anarcho-Syndicalist Review and on the Counterpunch website. Two articles concern the anti-strike law of 2019 and a new strategy for collective agreements that SAC has developed. Two more general texts on the future of syndicalism have been written by Gabriel Kuhn and Torsten Bewernitz on the Counterpunch website, and by Gabriel and Frederick Batzler in Anarcho-Syndicalist Review (issue #79, 2020). The new collective agreement strategy is being tested (at the time of publication) by warehouse workers at Ingram/Zalando in Stockholm. More such experiments await. Why should an international audience care about tiny Sweden and a syndicalist union of only 3,000 members? In a globally interconnected economy, one could argue that the class struggle in tiny villages may affect the mega cities and vice versa. Business leaders usually react hysterically even to small sparks of workers’ militancy as if they could spread wildly. If their forecast is correct, then maybe even the smallest spark is of interest to us all. In this essay, I will try to clarify the crossroads that SAC faces by replying to my comrades Gabriel Kuhn and Torsten Bewernitz. As Gabriel and Frederick Batzler express the same perspective in Anarcho-Syndicalist Review, my essay is a reply to the latter article as well. I also want to highlight a promising way to conduct class struggle, namely what I refer to as dual-track syndicalism . The essay draws from an upcoming book, Swedish syndicalism - An outline of its ideology and practice , written by me which will be published by the Local of SAC in the city of Umeå in the autumn of 2021. I want to emphasize that I’m not presenting the official position of SAC below, but my own opinions. On the Counterpunch website, Gabriel and Torsten have placed two projects in opposition to each other. On the one hand, the ambition to build a mass labor union. On the other, the ambition to train organizers who bring workers together regardless of union affiliation. Gabriel and Torsten put formal organization against informal mobilization of workers. The Swedish SAC cannot grow into a large union, they suspect, but syndicalists can play an important role in the workplaces. In short, my two comrades suggest that we abandon the project to build a formal mass union. Instead, they seem to put their hopes in networks of workplace organizers. Swedish readers may recognize this perspective from a recent debate in the SAC magazine Arbetaren . I regard the crossroads that Gabriel and Torsten describe as a misunderstanding. They describe two incompatible paths when these are actually two parallel tracks that can reinforce each other. Why not recruit as many members as possible and offer all members training in organizing? Why not try to build a big union and an even bigger movement within the working class? Gabriel and Torsten don’t touch on these questions, but do raise another question: should syndicalists put their own union or the working class at the center? Their answer is the latter. I say let’s do both! Let’s put workers at the center and develop a union in the midst of workers. In the 1930s, SAC had more than 30,000 members. No one can really predict if SAC will grow into a mass union again or not. We can only try and see. Oddly enough, SAC hasn’t made a large-scale attempt since the 1960s. During that decade SAC grew. I believe we need to build both SAC sections and cross-union groups; at least we need both sections and cross-union cohesion among w…
