---
title: "Excerpts From a Letter to a Friend Apropos Human Rights"
author: "Laurance Labadie"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/laurence-labadie-excerpts-from-a-letter-to-a-friend-apropos-human-rights"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From a carbon copy of the typed original, signed and dated April 19, 1949. Reprinted in Laurance LaBadie: Selected Essays (Libertarian Broadsides), James J. Martin, ed., Ralph Myles Publisher, Inc., 1978. Retrieved 10/25/2021 from http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/bright/labadie/LabadieE"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "laurence-labadie-excerpts-from-a-letter-to-a-friend-apropos-human-rights.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/laurence-labadie-excerpts-from-a-letter-to-a-friend-apropos-human-rights.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Apropos your series of articles on Human Rights: There was a University of Chicago “professor” who wrote a book entitled Might is Right , under the pseudonym of “Ragnar Redbeard.” In it he maintained that life is essentially a battle in which “to the victor belonged the spoils,” and claimed that the truth of this fundamental warfare is disguised by various pretenses, ruses, and moral codes, originated and propagated by the weak who couldn’t stand up to the stern realities and who expected to soften-up their adversaries. He elaborated his contentions by citing history, politics, business, religion, etc., in fact all the activities of humans (and animals?). The book is rather uncomfortably convincing, though I think the author was terribly unscientific and unreasonable in justifying what seems a pretty sorry scheme of things. It does not seem to require much acumen to realize that the power of might is the most potent ingredient regarding human conduct, and over-rides all “rights,” and until mankind decides to forego the use of might it will naturally be the deciding determinator. Stirner said, I would rather have a handful of might than a bagful of right,” or words to that effect. Anyhow, that is the only language that governments, as such, understand. “Rights” could hardly have preceded government in some form, as you surmise. Your “rights” are postulated as being against something, and the only thing anyone could be against was some hindrance to living, viz ., government. “Rights,” therefore, are usually considered as limitations on government (such as the Magna Charta and the American Bill of Rights, etc.). That governments had power, and could often over-ride “rights,” made it appear that the “rights” were granted by governments. Naturally, it wasn’t long before the theory arose that governments themselves were protectors of human “rights.” In fact, this is the kind of baloney taught in all “state-supported” schools, everywhere and at all times; and of course religious schools and churches teach that God grants all “rights.” Whether warfare, even though disguised, was and is a normal mode of human activity, it has been fairly well established that the origin of government was a band of robbers who in conquest set themselves up as rulers over the people they had plundered and subjugated. As it was to no advantage to have these slaves scramble among themselves, the tyrants “maintained law and order” among them, and in time even directed them in “public works,” such as building roads, making armor, battleships, etc. originally of course for purposes of further plunder and conquest. As time went on, the slaves actually believed they couldn’t do without their masters, until today we see them concernedly run to the polls to elect new ones every few years. These stupid human animals can become inured to almost anything, and only occasionally rebel, and demand “rights” for themselves, against their masters. They never dream of abolishing mastership itself. The most energetic advocates of “rights” are, naturally, authoritarian socialists, communists, fascists, nationalists, 100% Americans and what have you, and other such lack-wits ad nauseam, who want to set up a supreme master in the State which will take care of them and direct them in all things. Prior to government, there could not have been any concept of “rights” whatever. Men breathed, ate, hunted, propagated, etc., because it was the natural thing to do. No one could even imagine that. he did so because he had the “right” to do so. The American Indian, for example, lived in this clime not because he thought he had a “right” to use the earth. “Rights,” in land, originated or rather were brought here from Europe where property in land was “right.” By the way, I think your obsession about “rights” is a hangover from your ardent single-tax days. Altho it is improbable, “rights” may have originated by men agreeing to forego the use of might, to make recourse to consultation, com…
