---
title: "For a Single Word"
author: "Leo Tolstoy"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-for-a-single-word"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Original text from RevoltLib.com, 2021."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "leo-tolstoy-for-a-single-word.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-for-a-single-word.epub"
    hosted: false
---

I happened to be drinking tea this winter in a cook-shop where I am known. It was four o'clock in the afternoon, and being a regular customer, a newspaper was as usual handed to me, as a special mark of respect. Having put on the spectacles my old eyes require, I dived into the paper and became absorbed in an article about Leo Tolstoy. It was quiet in the place, there were few customers and I gave myself up entirely to the reading. My reading was interrupted by an old man in a peasant's coat, wearing bark shoes, and with a small bag on his arm, who came up and softly touched my shoulder, saying: "Won't you give me a kopeck [1] ? I'm hungry!" I was vexed at the fellow's impertinence in disturbing me. I considered myself poor, almost a beggar, though I did not go begging, and in my vexation, without looking up from the paper, I said: "There are plenty of you hungry ones loafing about! I am hungry myself. Go to the devil!" And having said this, I went on reading. But my reading was interrupted by a strange sound of convulsive weeping and sobbing. I took off my spectacles, laid them on the newspaper, and looked at the beggar, He was an old man, evidently a peasant: pale, thin and with a bent back. He stood without moving, and his sunken chest heaved again and again with sobs. I suddenly felt pained and ashamed. A lump rose in my throat, and I could hardly keep from tears (we old folk have a weakness that way). Feeling ashamed, I tried in my mind to ecuse myself for not having given him anything, and for having even told him to go to the devil. "I am hungry myself, out of work, and have a large family on my hands," thought I But immediately the voice of conscience began to speak in my soul. "Still, you should not treat him like that. It was wrong. You have done wrong brother Vasily!" said I to myself. I did not know what it was that made him weep so: the want of bread, or my rude refusal. In the sixty years of my life, I have seen but little joby, and since I can remember I have myself experienced the harshness of men, and heard from them just such words as I had said to the old man; but yet I felt pained and ashamed. I sat, he stood before me, and for a minute, we looked at each other in silence. It was long before I could find words to say to him; out at last, mastering my confusion, in a voice just as unsteady and timid as that in which he had asked me for a kopeck a minute before, I said: "What are you crying about, friend? It won't help matters - one has to beart things..." "It is hard to bear...I tried to find a job...No! Begging I'm not used to....and no one gives...there now, since they let me out of prison - will you believe it, Daddy - it's the third day and I've not had a pound of bread to eat...I'm that hungry!" He again sniffed, and tears again came into his eyes. I felt uncomfotable, but as it seemed to me that this man, let out from prison, was not in such despair merely for want of bread, but had something more important on his mind, I tried to get into conversation with him, in order if possible to comfort him. "Teras won't do muh good," I said, "they'll only upset you still more. There! Sit down by me here, and let's have a talk. Tell me all about it, plainly." The old man sat down by me, and placed his bag on his knees, and I began to question him. "Where are you from?" "I? I am from the Koursk Government, Oboyansk District, Rybatzk Parish, Bopbrofka Village." "How did you get here?" "How did I get here? I was sent here as an exile." "What was that for?" "Why exiled? Why, for one single word!" "What word was that, my good fellow?" He faltered, as if afraid to tell me what word it was he suffered for. Though I am myself a peasant, I was dressed in town clothes. I wore a pea-jacket, and strong boots and goloshes; and a newspaper and spectacles were lying in front of me. He noted all this searchingly and suspiciously and remained silent; probably suspecting me of some evil intention. "He's not asking without a reaso…
