---
title: "Fuck Your Red Revolution"
author: "ziq"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ziq-fuck-your-red-revolution-against-ecocide-towards-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Against Ecocide, Towards Anarchy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ziq-fuck-your-red-revolution-against-ecocide-towards-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ziq-fuck-your-red-revolution-against-ecocide-towards-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Let Go Of Your Tedious Slogans        Harm Reduction is Valuable        Personal Action Doesn’t Happen in a Vacuum: Working Towards a Lasting Cultural Shift        Fuck Your Luxury Space Communism        Ethics-Based Choices Aren’t “Liberal” Just Because Pompous Reds Say So        Capitalism & Communism Are Cut From the Same Exploitative Industrial Cloth        Embracing Pointed Distractions & Recognizing Ideological Greenwashing        Understanding the Coercion Behind the “Collective Good”        Reject Collectivism, Embrace Anarchy “There’s no ethical consumption under capitalism” is a tired meme that I wish would die. So often this slogan is used by reds to pooh-pooh those of us that strive to make life choices that aid harm-reduction in our communities and our natural environments. Vegan diets, bicycling, dumpster diving, upcycling, guerilla gardening, permaculture, squatting, illegalism, food forestry, communes, self-sufficiency, and all the other “lifestylist” pursuits “individualist” anarchists undertake to minimize their harm on the environment are shamed and mocked by many anarcho-communists, social-ecologists, anarcho-transhumanists, syndicalists and other industry-upholding anarchists. These reds are well-versed in workerist rhetoric, and see all lifestyle choices as “a distraction” from the global proletarian revolution they see as their singular goal. You’ll hear them talk down to other anarchists who are discussing ethical ways to curtail their consumption, especially people that live off the land or otherwise limit their participation in industrial civilization; people they loudly dismiss and condemn as “primmies” or “lifestylists”. They’ll tell us to stop living our lives in the pursuit of personal anarchy because “there’s no ethical consumption under capitalism”. In the red mind, as long as a capitalist system has been imposed on the world, there”s no point in reaching for anarchy until that system has been overthrown and replaced with their system. Regardless of how unlikely it is that this will happen in our lifetimes. Using “no ethical consumption” to shame people for making the effort to live more conscientiously, and decrying all individual action as “counter-revolutionary” or “liberal” comes from a deeply authoritarian mindset reminiscent of toxic Maoist purges that punished people for dressing differently or having hobbies or doing anything but devote themselves 100% to destructive industrial labor and the glory of “the revolution” (almost always manifested in the form of a red state). The red influence in anarchist discourse is unfortunately dominant in most developed parts of the world, and collectivist-minded anarchists insist every anarchist devote themselves to their pipe dream of a mass uprising to seize the factories from the capitalists and turn them over to the workers. They postulate that democratized factories will be more beneficial to workers because they’ll receive a bigger piece of the industrial pie. This is true. But then they claim their ideology will “save the environment” because a worker collective won’t be greedy and destructive like a capitalist board of directors. This is of course completely unfounded and blatantly ignores the history of collectivized industry and its devastating effects on the environment. The glaring reality is that industrial societies all eventually lead to ecocide, without exception. Countless Marxist revolutions in history did so much damage to the environment that entire territories, such as the area surrounding Chernobyl, were rendered uninhabitable to humans. Babies continue to be born with birth defects today, and cancer rates in the regions devastated by socialist industry continue to be sky high. Let’s take a brief look at the former USSR’s legacy of careless industrial destruction, with 3 examples. The Ural River in Magnitogorsk, Russia is still saturated with toxic boron and chromium levels from the nearby Steel Works, poisoning the entire …
