---
title: "Bureaucracy Is Suffocating The Bolivian People’s Movement"
author: "Juventudes Libertarias"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/juventudes-libertarias-bureaucracy-is-suffocating-the-bolivian-people-s-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "(Translation from the Spanish by Robby Barnes and Sylvie Kashdan) Retrieved on 3rd August from http://www.ainfos.ca/01/may/ainfos00550.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "juventudes-libertarias-bureaucracy-is-suffocating-the-bolivian-people-s-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/juventudes-libertarias-bureaucracy-is-suffocating-the-bolivian-people-s-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

By the end of April, 2001 discontent was widespread, and the popular movement was posing a serious threat to the Banzer government. Workers in the majority of industries were resisting the state’s structures and institutions, and even capitalism itself. The COB National Convention also took place at the end of April. Its delegates agreed upon a total blockage of all highways throughout the country as a way of demanding the ouster of the Banzer government and an end to neoliberalism. But, the convention was manipulated by people friendly to the government, delegates were bribed, and Felipe Quispe “El Mallku” was re-elected. Nevertheless, Convention delegates were able to pass some radical resolutions; but these were later ignored by Quispe, as he set out to confuse the population with ambiguous and contradictory statements. For example, one day he announced in no uncertain terms that the highway blockades would begin on May first, the next day he said they would be earlier, and later on he said they would be postponed to the end of May. He did all this arbitrarily, without consulting anyone. Quispe also attacked the other groups in the struggle, making all kinds of vague accusations against them. Finally, on April 28, he announced that the highway blockades would be postponed for a month, which drained the popular movement of much of its strength. But the COB delegates resolved to continue with the protest, and on May First a march of five thousand workers from Oruro to La Paz was begun. The march arrived in La Paz on May 9, but by that time the bureaucrats had already negotiated with the government. Just hours before some four thousand workers were scheduled to enter La Paz, at a time when everything was pointing to a truly insurrectional situation that would decapitate the Banzer government, the Central Obrera Boliviana (Bolivian Labor Organization, COB)struck a deal with the government. The nearly four thousand workers, who had walked 200 kilometers (124 miles) during the previous nine days, along the Altiplano highway, entered the center of La Paz a little past noon. The wave of conflicts began a month ago when the farmers who produce coca in the Chapare region launched a march on the capital, then blocked the highway between Santa Cruz and Cochabamba. They were showing their opposition to the government’s program of coca eradication. Tensions increased when the Confederación de Campesinos (Farmers Confederation) threatened to block the highways to force recognition of their demands. This was followed by a strike of employees of the main public health insurance program, a voluntary fast by 3,500 retirees calling for an increase in their pensions, and protests against the bad condition of the highways by the transport workers union. Then president Banzer’s government reached agreements with all of the groups involved. During 2000 a similar wave of protests came close to toppling Banzer and the present economic system. Freed from the guidance of the bureaucracies, groups of exploited people engaged in direct action and build truly grass-roots organizations which brought spontaneity and popular initiative to the potentially revolutionary situation. Notable among the demands of many of the groups has been a call for repeal of capitalist neoliberal policies and the expulsion of multinational companies. One of the most combative groups was the retired miners, who started an indefinite hunger strike that claimed the life of one elderly man. Their determination and tradition of struggle brought their goals within reach. Because of the pressure from the involvement of more than 35 labor groupings, the C.O.B. announced a general strike for the First of May. The strike movement was weakened by the farmers’ leaders, headed by Felipe Quisp “El Mallku”), who in a shameless maneuver refused to follow the resolutions of the farmers convention which had called for highway blockages. By doing this, “El Mallku” committed one of the most repug…
