---
title: "Escape from Oblivion"
author: "Yiannis Dimitrakis"
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yiannis-dimitrakis-escape-from-oblivion"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "(First Attempt)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yiannis-dimitrakis-escape-from-oblivion.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yiannis-dimitrakis-escape-from-oblivion.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The following is a translation of the first part of Dimitrakis’ own autobiographical account, recently published in the premier issue of “Storming the Bastille: Voices from the Inside”, which brings together a number of texts and letters written by prisoners in struggle. I always keep in mind that image of myself, passing by the prison, unconsciously looking up at the high walls and the barbed wire on top. Which prison was it? Whenever I went with some friends by motorcycle to the Nikaia neighborhood, we rode down Grigoriou Lambraki Street, and the stone walls of Korydallos Prison mesmerized me. I don’t know why. Was it because there were times I found myself on the nearby streets — breathing room, but never too close, since all the approaches were completely blocked by the police — simply because of one of the marches in solidarity with comrade prisoners? Or was it perhaps because that enormous, imposing building, so diligently concealing everything going on inside its heart — an entirely unknown world with its own laws and rules, full of heroic stories and human torment — merely piqued my curiosity? Now that I think about it, I remember another time when I was in front of a prison. It must have been in the spring of 2003, when we were demonstrating outside the Larissa “penitentiary” institution. Yet another dungeon located in the suburbs of that city, next to a school. There, prisoners have the unfortunate privilege of being able to test the Thessaly countryside’s paranoid climate on their own skin. In the summer, you stew in your own juices, with temperatures around 43ºC. And in the winter, you search frantically for a little heat beneath a mountain of blankets in order to escape the cold, which sometimes dips below -10ºC. Pure madness. I learned this first-hand from prisoners who did time there, and Vangelis Pallis confirmed it to me in the summer of 2008, when we were talking to each other every day. The demonstration was held in the city’s main square, which was surrounded by cafés. I had the impression that the locals were staring at us in bewilderment, as if they were seeing something completely foreign or extraterrestrial. We had come to Larissa because rumors were spreading about the construction of a new prison wing — a solitary confinement wing — intended for the people implicated in the case of the November 17 Revolutionary Organization. This meant that they would be transferred from the special wing at Korydallos, which would cause many problems for them, their families, and their lawyers, given the distance from Athens. It’s not easy to cover 700 kilometers round-trip for an hour-and-a-half visit. I immediately noticed the combative-looking black bloc gathering in the square. Then, the march moved toward the prison. When the demonstration began, it naturally continued to draw stares from the locals. As expected, two or three buses full of riot police — plus rows of green uniforms containing something resembling human beings — were waiting for us at our destination, thus preventing us from getting any closer to the prison. Our slogans and cries were joined by some loud whistling, and from the other side hands reached out as far as they could between the cell bars to greet us by waving shirts and sheets. Because of the distance, we couldn’t see their faces, so each one of us imagined someone desperately trying to give back what they were receiving. Was it solidarity, or just the simple presence of human beings? Who knows. The march left us all feeling good. There were plenty of people, and it had “impact,” enthusiasm, and tension. However, what remains etched in my memory of that day is an image I don’t know how many others could have seen. As we were covering the last stretch before the prison — passing the last few houses in the city, our slogans echoing in the air — my gaze fell on a silhouette on the balcony of an old two-story home. Taking a closer look, I was astonished to see a little old man — about 80 yea…
