---
title: "Antinomians and Nonconformists"
author: "Ahmet Karamustafa"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ahmet-karamustafa-antinomians-and-nonconformists"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Excerpt from Chapter 6 of Sufism: The Formative Period, which discusses the anarchist tendencies of certain Sufis in 9th century Iraq. Retrieved on 18th May 2021 from www.jstor.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ahmet-karamustafa-antinomians-and-nonconformists.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ahmet-karamustafa-antinomians-and-nonconformists.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The early Sufis of the third/ninth century occupied a peculiar place in the social and mental world of Islamic Iraq. Unlike many itinerant renunciants who roamed the countryside, the Sufis firmly implanted themselves into the major urban centres of Baghdad and Basra, yet they were not altogether ‘mainstream’ and harboured anti-social and antinomian tendencies side by side with socially and legally-conformist ones. Socially, their nonconformist strains included distinct strands of celibacy, vegetarianism, avoidance of gainful employment, withdrawal and seclusion, as well as a certain proclivity for outlandish even outrageous behaviour (Nuri and Shibli stand out in this regard), though these were not universally accepted or practised by all or even most Sufis. Other characteristic Sufi practices and beliefs, notably sama – which tended to be a peculiar blend of music, poetry and dance – and discourses of closeness to God, did not necessarily deviate from the social mainstream and may have even been popular, yet they could be legally and theologically suspect. In this sense, the Sufis of Iraq, who can be said to have harboured anarchist tendencies, were among the social and intellectual avant-garde of early Islam. As an inward-orientated form of piety, Sufism contained an intensely self-critical strain from its very beginnings, and astute Sufi observers who surveyed the Sufi scene tackled the task of disentangling the ‘questionable and undesirable’ elements of their heritage from its ‘genuine’ solid core. On this front, Sarraj and Hujwiri stand out as forthright and honest surveyors of the whole canvas of Sufism who documented and discussed critically the contentious aspects of their tradition without making any undue compromises from what they considered to be its core (which, for them, definitely included sama – but not dance – and discourses of proximity and special access to God). The oeuvre of Ansari and Sulami, both inclusive and expansive, are also revealing in this regard. Kalabadhi and Qushayri, however, were more circumspect; they had a somewhat less inclusive and ‘sanitised’ picture of Sufism, one that was so closely aligned with their scholarly predilections that there was little room left for unruly elements. Naturally, Sufis were not the only ones to write critically on Sufi subjects. As Sufism became socially more prominent, it caught the attention of ‘outsiders’ who recorded their reactions to this form of pious living in their works, mostly in the form of brief incidental comments. Since Sufism of Iraq first emerged as a synthesis of pre-existing strands of piety, it is not surprising that some of the themes sounded by its outsider critics had precedents in earlier ‘heresiographical’ literature. A revealing example is the following passage on heretics called ‘pneumatics’ ( ru˙aniyya ) from Abu ‘asim Khushaysh ibn Asram al-Nasa’i’s (d. 253/867) Kitab al-istiqama fi ’l-sunna wa al-radd ‘ala ahl al-ahwa ( The Book of Sound Tradition and Refutation of Dissenters ): They are so called because they believe that their spirits see the malakut [‘the divine dominion’] of the heavens, that they see the pasture of paradise, and further, that they have sexual intercourse with the houris. Furthermore, they believe that they wander with their spirits in paradise. They are also called fi kriyya [‘meditationists’] because they meditate and believe that in their meditation they can reach God in reality. Thus they make their meditation the object of their devotions and of their striving towards God. In their meditation they see this goal by means of their spirit, through God speaking to them directly, passing his hand gently over them, and – as they believe – looking upon them directly, while they have intercourse with the houris and dally with them as they lay upon their couches, and while eternally young boys bring them food and drink and exquisite fruit. [1] Khushaysh proceeded to report on other groups of mystics. Other mystics…
