---
title: "After the Dust Settles"
author: "Jack White"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-white-after-the-dust-settles"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Lessons from the Summit Protests"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jack-white-after-the-dust-settles.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-white-after-the-dust-settles.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Local anarchist movements          Prague          Quebec          Genoa        Q. What type of coalitions were organising the demonstrations in your city?          Prague          Montreal          Genoa        Q. In Ireland we experienced a certain level of police harrassement when organising protests on May Day. What was your experience?          Prague          Montreal          Genoa        Q. What did you decide to do on the day and what influenced your decision?          Prague          Quebec          Genoa        Q. Now that the dust has settled, what do you think were the successes and failures of your action?          Prague          Quebec          Genoa        Q. What was the effect of the protests on the public perception of anarchism in your country?          Prague          Quebec          Genoa        Q. Hindsight is 20:20. If you were going to do it all over again what would you do differently?          Prague          Quebec          Genoa        Where? When? What? — The Protests        Alpahabet Soup — The Protestors          Czech Republic          Quebec          Genoa In recent years anarchism has had a re-emergence in the popular consciousness. For many people what was a piece of social history, a slogan used by cartoon terrorists or a word associated with punk rock is now a form of political struggle no matter how hazily understood. One of the reasons for this has been the role anarchists have played in the anti-globalisation movements and especially in the large anti-globalisation demonstrations in the recent years. Despite the very real problems associated with the idea of ‘summit hopping’ and spectacular protest these manifestations have provided a public face of anarchism and at least as importantly have given anarchists an opportunity to work together and with likeminded groups in relatively large numbers. The impact of these demonstrations has been global, showing many that despite the end of the Cold War and the subsequent much heralded ‘end of history’ that there is resistance to the neo-liberal project and that social struggle has not gone away. The rise in radical activity in Ireland, amongst other places, shows that events in far off lands can also influence and promote resistance at home. What is often overlooked is the impact these events have in the country they take place in. Each manifestation has been different and each has affected the ‘host’ grouping differently. This article is not supposed to be a definitive account or survey on what happens to anarchists when the face of global capitalism comes to their town rather it is a sample, a necessarily brief study of some of what certain groups went through during the organisation, participation in and fallout from these events. The main sources for this article are interviews carried out over email with Alice Dvorska of the Czech Slovak Anarchist Federation (www.csaf.cz), Nicholas Phebus from Groupe Anarchist Emile Henry, a local affiliate of the North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists (NEFAC www.nefac.net) and Fabrizio and Stefano of the Genovese Federazione dei Comunisti Anarchici (www.fdca.it). [1] Unfortunately due to space restrictions I have had to edit their responses in places and paraphrase them in others. I first asked about the anarchist movments in the three cities. While the movement was relatively young and small in Prague and Montreal, in Genoa there was a longer legacy of anarchist struggle. Historically there was an active anarchist movement in the Czech part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries. Originally individualistic, it was later connected with anarcho-syndicalism and mining strikes. The movement’s foci were anti-militarism and anti-clericalism. It also had an important cultural dimension with several well-known poets and writers claiming to be anarchists. Anarchist organisations and magazines were prohibited at the beginning of World War I. Some struggled for …
