---
title: "An Anarchist Response to a Trotskyist Attack"
author: "Wayne Price"
date: "2014"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-price-an-anarchist-response-to-a-trotskyist-attack"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Review of “An Introduction to Marxism and Anarchism” by Alan Woods (2011)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wayne-price-an-anarchist-response-to-a-trotskyist-attack.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-price-an-anarchist-response-to-a-trotskyist-attack.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Why Anarchism Now?        The Revolutionary Minority        “Taking Power” vs. “Taking State Power”        The Russian Revolution        The “Workers’ State”?        References Review of work by international Trotskyist leader The leader of the International Marxist Tendency has written an attack on anarchism from his Trotskyist perspective. He makes some correct criticisms of some versions of anarchism, in relation to those who reject revolution or political organization. But he attempts to defend the idea of a “workers’ state” by limited quotes from Lenin and by mistating the history of the Russian revolution. [ Italiano ] Why should anarchists read about a Trotskyist attack on anarchism? For that matter, why should anyone learn about a point of view with which they know they disagree? There are at least two reasons. First, we anarchists will have to work with Trotskyists, discuss with Trotskyists, and debate with Trotskyists. They are all over movements of opposition! We should know what they think. We may have to argue with them in front of other people who are deciding between Trotskyism and anarchism. We may discuss with Trotskyists who might be open to changing their minds. I have known quite a few people who have gone from Trotskyism to anarchism--and some who have gone the other way. (I myself have gone from anarchist-pacifism to an unorthodox Trotskyism to revolutionary anarchism.) Second, there is no better way to explore the weaknesses in our own views than to argue with a political opponent. Many times I have discussed with someone I strongly disagreed with, to find them pointing out difficulties in my opinions. By considering the points they raised, I have been able (I hope) to improve my own views. There are many versions of Trotskyism (and even more varieties of Marxism). Alan Woods is the British leader of one international Trotskyist organization, the International Marxist Tendency. Their US group is the Workers International League, which puts out “Socialist Appeal.” This pamphlet was written as the introduction to a collection of writings on anarchism and Marxism. So Woods should know what he is talking about, at least about Marxism. About anarchism is another matter. For example, he does not acknowledge that there are also many varieties of anarchism. He treats anarchism as a homogeneous block, so that the weaknesses he finds in one tendency applies to all of anarchism. Woods pats anarchists on the head for their militancy and activism in today’s conditions. He also writes of the US union historically most influenced by anarchism, “ The IWW was consistently revolutionary and based itself on the most intransigent class struggle doctrines ,” (p. 8). Yet he denounces anarchists as believing in “ confusion, organizational amorphousness, and the absence of ideological definition ” (p. 4). Why then have many militants found anarchism attractive? Woods treats this question as old-hat; young radicals just have not read the historical documents. “The question of Marxism vs. anarchism has long been discussed” (p. 3). He declares (paraphrasing an argument of Lenin’s), “ anarchist trends have been growing as a result of the bankruptcy of the reformist leaders of the mass workers’ organizations ” (p. 6). In other words, many activists have been disgusted by the sell-out, pro-capitalist, ineffective, approaches of liberal Democrats, union officials, “Communists”, and reformist “democratic socialists”—and therefore turned to the militant, thoroughly oppositional approach of anarchism. This is certainly true. But it has been some time since Lenin made this point. There is another important reason activists are attracted to anarchism. Since those good old days, Marxists have not only been “reformists.” Following Lenin’s lead, they have overthrown existing states in countries all over the world, built up their own states, and nationalized their countries’ economies. The results have been totalitarian monstrosities, e…
