---
title: "Church and State"
author: "Leo Tolstoy"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-church-and-state"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Nathan Haskell Dole Retrieved on 2nd April 2021 from en.wikisource.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "leo-tolstoy-church-and-state.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-church-and-state.epub"
    hosted: false
---

WHAT an extraordinary thing it is ! There are people who seem ready to climb out of their skins for the sake of making others accept this, and not that, form of revelation. They cannot rest till others have accepted their form of revelation, and no other. They anathematize, persecute, and kill whom they can of the dissentients. Other groups of people do the same anathematize, persecute, and kill whom they can of the dissentients. And others again do the same. So that they are all anathematizing, persecuting, and killing demanding that every one should believe as they do. And it results that there are hundreds of sects all anathematizing, persecuting, and killing one another. At first I was astonished that such an obvious absurdity such an evident contradiction did not destroy religion itself. How can religious people remain so deluded ? And really, viewed from the general, external point of view it is incomprehensible, and proves irrefragably that every religion is a fraud, and that the whole thing is superstition, as the dominant philosophy of today declares. And looking at things from this general point of view, I inevitably came to acknowledge that all religion is a human fraud. But I could not help pausing at the reflection that the very absurdity and obviousness of the fraud, and the fact that nevertheless all humanity yields to it, indicates that this fraud must rest on some basis that is not fraudulent. Otherwise we could not let it deceive us it is too stupid. The very fact that all of mankind that really lives a human life yields to this fraud, obliged me to acknowledge the importance of the phenomena on which the fraud is based. And in consequence of this reflection, I began to analyze the Christian teaching, which, for all Christendom, supplies the basis of this fraud. That is what was apparent from the general point of view. But from the individual point of view which shows us that each man (and I myself) must, in order to live, always have a religion show him the meaning of life the fact that violence is employed in questions of religion is yet more amazing in its absurdity. Indeed how can it, and why should it, concern any one to make somebody else, not merely have the same religion as himself, but also profess it in the same way as he does ? A man lives, and must, therefore, know why he lives. He has established his relation to God ; he knows the very truth of truths, and I know the very truth of truths. Our expression may differ; the essence must be the same we are both of us men. Then why should I what can induce me to oblige any one or demand of any one absolutely to express his truth as I express it ? I cannot compel a man to alter his religion either by violence or by cunning or by fraud false miracles. His religion is his life. How can I take from him his religion and give him another ? It is like taking out his heart and putting another in its place. I can only do that if his religion and mine are words, and are not what gives him life ; if it is a wart and not a heart. Such a thing is impossible also, because no man can deceive or compel another to believe what he does not believe ; for if a man has adjusted his relation toward God and knows that religion is the relation in which man stands toward God he cannot desire to define another man’s relation to God by means of force or fraud. That is impossible, but yet it is being done, and has been done everywhere and always. That is to say, it can never really be done, because it is in itself impossible ; but something has been done, and is being done, that looks very much like it. What has been, and is being done, is that some people impose on others a counterfeit of religion and others accept this counterfeit this sham religion. Religion cannot be forced and cannot be accepted for the sake of anything, force, fraud, or profit. Therefore what is so accepted is not religion but a fraud. And this religious fraud is a long-established condition of man’s life. I…
