---
title: "The experiment of West Kurdistan (Syrian Kurdistan) has proved that people can make changes"
author: "Zaher Baher"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/zaher-baher-the-experiment-of-west-kurdistan-syrian-kurdistan-has-proved-that-people-can-make-c"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An interesting report by Zaher Baher of Haringey Solidarity Group and Kurdistan Anarchists Forum who spent two weeks in Syrian Kurdistan, looking at the experiences of self-government in the region against the background of the Syrian civil war and rise of Islamic State. Retrieved on 19th August 202"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "zaher-baher-the-experiment-of-west-kurdistan-syrian-kurdistan-has-proved-that-people-can-make-c.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/zaher-baher-the-experiment-of-west-kurdistan-syrian-kurdistan-has-proved-that-people-can-make-c.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The background        The Arab Spring        The Democratic Self Administration (DSA)        The economic situation in Al Jazera Canton        The Political Situation in Al Jazera        Women and the Role of Women        The Communes        The Kurdish and Christians opposition parties        The Shameful Trench        Expectation and fears          The external factors        The role and the influences of neighbouring countries in the region        The Role of China and Russia        The Internal Factors        Tev-Dam becomes weak        The PYD and its party structures        The fear of Ideology and Ideologists that can became sacred        The Role of the Communes        The Conclusion and my final words          How do I connect the above point to the experiment of the people in West Kurdistan? What you read below is the experience of my visit, for a couple of weeks in May this year, 2014, to North East of Syria or Syrian Kurdistan (West of Kurdistan) with a close friend of mine. Throughout the visit we had the total freedom and opportunity to see and speak to whoever we wanted to. This includes women, men, youth, and the political parties. There are over 20 parties from Kurdish to Christian, of which some are in the Democratic Self Administration (DSA) or Democratic Self Management (DSM) of the region of Al Jazera. Al Jazera is one of three regions, (cantons) of West Kurdistan. We also met the Kurdish and Christian political parties who are not in the DSA or DSM. In addition, we met the top people from the Democratic Self Administration (DSM), members of the different committees, local groups and communes as well as businesspeople, shopkeepers, workers, people in the market and people who were just walking in the street. Kurdistan is a land of around 40 million people that was divided between Iraq, Syria, Iran and Turkey after the First World War. Historically, the Kurds have suffered massacres and genocide at the hands of successive regimes, especially in Iraq and Turkey. Since then they have continuously suffered and been oppressed at the hands of the central governments of the countries Kurdistan was annexed to. In Iraqi Kurdistan, under Saddam Hussein’s regime, the Kurdish people suffered chemical weapon attacks under Operation Anfal [1] . In Turkey, until recently, Kurds did not even have the basic rights of talking in their own language. Historically, they have been recognized as the Turkish who live in the mountains (a reference to the Kurdistan region as there are so many mountains there). In Syria, the Kurds’ situation was little better than Turkey. In Iran they have some basic rights and are recognized as forming a different nation from Persians but have no autonomy. After the first gulf war in 1991, the Kurdish people in Iraq managed to set up their own regional government, the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG). After the invasion and occupation of Iraq in 2003, the Kurdish people took advantage of this to strengthen their local power. They managed to gain the right to having their own self administration, budget, parliaments and army. These have now all been recognized by the central Iraqi Government and, to a certain extent, are supported by the central government. This has encouraged and had a positive impact on the other parts of Kurdistan, especially in Turkey and Syria. In the same year as the invasion of Iraq (2003), the Kurdish people in Syria set up their own party, the Democratic Union Party (PYD); although there were already a number of other Kurdish parties and organizations that existed in the region. Some of them are so old that they date back to the 1960s, but they were ineffective compared to the PYD which has developed and spread rapidly among the Kurdish people there. The Arab Spring reached Syria at the beginning of 2011 and, after a short time, spread to the Syrian Kurdistan regions /cantons of: Al Jazera, Kobany and Afrin. The protest among the Kurdish people in those three can…
