---
title: "Anarchist and Insurgent Self-Critique of Recent Tactics"
author: "Monadists"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/monadists-anarchist-and-insurgent-self-critique-of-recent-tactics"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2021-04-20 from https://medium.com/@monadists/anarchist-and-insurgent-self-critique-of-recent-tactics-1f7b5f0eea94"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "monadists-anarchist-and-insurgent-self-critique-of-recent-tactics.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/monadists-anarchist-and-insurgent-self-critique-of-recent-tactics.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Background of movement dynamics and insurgency        What role do anarchists play in this?        And the criticism? Diversity of tactics should mean diversity of tactics        On counter-insurgency        It’s for our own good Despite contributing in a number of useful ways to the uprising last summer and the events that have played out in the year since, anarchists are in danger of being outsmarted by becoming creatures of habit. Every movement, revolution, or war for freedom starts with a tension between two elements, popularization vs. “militantization.” The most powerful theoretical scenario in any movement would be if every single member in a society were engaged at their peak militant tactical capacity fighting on behalf of the same cause. However, the tension here is that the insurgent core of a movement has less and less influence the more popularized a movement becomes. While at the same time non-insurgent and internal counter-insurgent influences have more influence, ultimately leading it to increased pacification. The police play an external counter-insurgent role by explicitly repressing the movement. In doing so, they may nip a movement in the bud so that it never reaches past singular isolated protests. But they also risk their repression backfiring, that people become so appalled with the police repression that they unintentionally accelerate the movement’s popularization. Depending on the culture of the society (how normalized police presence and violence is, how likely people are to come out in solidarity for something, how the media reports on protests), police have to balance this so that they are playing a repressive role but a repressive role that they hope will be overlooked. Police tactics play another role in aiding the growth of movements. The more they play a repressive role, the more radicalized the people in the crowd become and the more likely they are to adopt militant strategies of protest, and may join the core of insurgents in the movement. This is called battle-hardening. The insurgent core is the group of protesters who are militant and radicalized from past protests and their lived experiences from outside of protests. In their ideal scenario, the movement would popularize to 100% of its capacity and seamlessly 100% of those people would join the insurgency. The police ideal strategy, once popularization has begun, is to isolate 100% of insurgents from the broader movement, forking them into two unrelated movements. This is counter-insurgency 101 that is taught to police and militaries all over the world. If this happens, the popularization will be short lived and ultimately impotent, and the insurgents will be ostracized from the larger movement and either made inactive or face arrest or other repression. If they accomplish this, it is over and nothing will be accomplished. With every new movement this process is started off from scratch, with some people carrying over from one to the next especially in the insurgent core, but with generally an entirely new core of people who will either be influenced by the insurgency or not. In recent years, anarchists have occupied a section of this continuing insurgent core that moves from one movement to the next. This has been simply because they keep participating in movements, and their ideals and tactics are accepting of militancy. However, they don’t solely occupy this insurgent core, and oftentimes might only make up a tiny fraction of it. Likewise, many anarchists don’t always play this role, and many don’t even participate in movements. In recent years, as debates about violence and non-violence have proliferated so has the usage of “diversity of tactics.” It has become a euphemism to mean “…and militancy is okay too.” However, as anarchists we could stand to learn more from our own philosophy in these regards. Class war (and oppressive power dynamics) operate in every conceivable venue of human life. That’s why diversity of tactics a…
