---
title: "From a Matter of Principle to a Matter of Tactics"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-from-a-matter-of-principle-to-a-matter-of-tactics"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://unravel.noblogs.org/from-a-matter-of-principle-to-a-matter-of-tactics/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-from-a-matter-of-principle-to-a-matter-of-tactics.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-from-a-matter-of-principle-to-a-matter-of-tactics.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       From a Matter of Principle to a Matter of Tactics        Continua of Tactics        Complex Coordinated Terrorist Attacks        Why Coordinated Attacks?        Comparison of Coordinated Attacks to Other Tactics        Some Drawbacks of Coordinated Attacks        Mitigating Risk        Surveillance Cameras as Small, Lower Risk Actions to Build Affinity        An Example        A Note on Group Size        Endnote Anarchists who want to take action, when confronted with the choice of tactics, often default to large mass actions, like black bloc. Imagination is ceded to tactical hegemony; autonomy diminishes; creativity recedes; resistance is franchised with stale, processed, prepackaged ideologies and tactics; questionable organizational methods like spokes-councils and democratic decision making give a participatory veneer to a sealed deal–just like in any liberal democracy; most participants spectate rather than act, learning by passive imitation of the leaders rather than active involvement in intimate relations with experienced trusted friends. We hope to put an end to this stagnation by giving anarchists some ideas about tactical alternatives to large mass actions. Here we discuss Coordinated Attacks, an extension of single group clandestine actions to multiple groups operating in loose collaboration simultaneously. While the tactics discussed here are not new, we believe our analysis can help anarchists better understand their action options, avoid getting into a rut of the same old tired tactics, choose the option most suited to their objectives, and most importantly, be creative and experiment with new ways of acting. We propose some ways of comparing alternative tactics, such as single group clandestine actions, large mass actions, and calls to action, so as to aid selection among these tactics, and aid generation of new ones. Some important features that differentiate these tactics are (i) Total group size . the total number of people participating in an action (ii) Subgroup size . if there are subgroups, usually in the form of affinity groups, the number of people in the subgroups and whether they are too big, too small, or just right sized for their task (iii) Timing . whether subgroups act simultaneously or asynchronously (iv) Communication . whether the subgroups communicate with each other to coordinate prior to the action (v) Complementarity . whether the subgroup actions complement each other (vi) Dependency . whether the actions of subgroups depend on the actions of other subgroups With the hope of expanding the reader's tactical imagination, we draw on a type of tactic that is feared by the US government, and used by serious resistance movements across the world. Complex Coordinated Terrorist Attacks, so called by the US government, are tactics that use large groups composed of small coordinated subgroups that work simultaneously and complementarily, but have low or no dependency across subgroups during the action. https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/planning-considerations-complex-coordinated-terrorist-attacks.pdf A complex coordinated terrorist attack works to complete some nefarious objective with smaller subgroups that each have a number of members right sized to their subtasks, usually act simultaneously to keep their opposition off balance and maximize impact, and communicate directly with each other prior to the action so as to act in ways that are complementary, or at least not work at cross purposes. It is worth thinking about why the US government fears these tactics, and why groups that use these tactics rarely, or never, use large mass actions. Why is the US government afraid? Because these tactics are difficult to predict, prevent, and control once they've started. Why do these groups use complex coordinated terrorist attacks rather than large mass actions? Because they need to maximize their impact while minimizing risk. For this reason, they tend to only engage in open battle…
