---
title: "Fundamentals in Reform"
author: "William Henry van Ornum"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-henry-van-ornum-fundamentals-in-reform"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Address Delivered Before the La Salle Educational Club, of Chicago, on Sunday, Feb. 2, 1896."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-henry-van-ornum-fundamentals-in-reform.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-henry-van-ornum-fundamentals-in-reform.epub"
    hosted: false
---

My purpose, in this address, is to bring about a juster understanding and appreciation of different classes of reformers among one another and to direct their attention to what seems the most practical as well as the easiest method of reform which is already within their grasp whenever they are willing to undertake it. I have no expectation of bringing about any formal union of those different classes; but only to favorably incline the most thoughtful individuals among them toward united action; and to soften, in some degree, the asperities which now prevail. Hoping that it will not entirely fail of its purpose, is the hope of… The Author. Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen: Three little girls, from 15 to 16 years of age, kept for more than six weeks in a loft over a saloon, for the gratification of the brutal lust of the saloonkeeper, his bartender and their male friends, during which time they were never permitted to go to their homes: I say, kept for more than six weeks on beer, pop and whisky, in a loft devoid of furniture of any kind, and nothing but a pile of hay in a corner for a bed – is the picture which was presented in a Chicago police court a few weeks ago. So brutal were the details of this horrible story that even the Chicago justice, familiar as he was with stories of depravity, bowed his head and groaned when he contemplated it. And yet, you know; and I know; and everyone who is familiar with the condition of the poor in this great city knows that even this does not sound the depths of degradation which everywhere exist among them. This is only one of a thousand and one forms in which the brutalizing hand of poverty is seen. Stories like this are not every day told in the newspapers; but the facts are here, in infinite variety, just the same. What was true of those little girls may become true of my own little ones, or of yours, or even of those who are now surrounded by the most comfortable and happy homes. Causes are at work in society which are producing just such results. These are but the fruit that naturally grows upon the tree of this false and vicious social system which we are trying to reform. It is a knowledge of these things that drives me by a power which I could not resist even if I wanted to, and which I would not if I could, to devote my life to the work of changing the conditions which make these things possible, not merely for my own, but for all mankind; for I know that there is no safety for my little ones so long as there is danger for any other. And I want to ask every man and woman in this hall today to register one firm resolve that we will, under any and all circumstances, work for the destruction of this hellish system that pauperizes and brutalizes good and bad, male and female, wise and simple, and the old as well as the young; that we will not spare either time or means, so far as lies in our power, to make possible a better a fuller and a freer life for every human being. Will you do it? The next thing is, how shall we do it? It is to the how and the what that I wish to direct your attention today. First, reform does not exist in palliating existing evils. If we have a tree that bears bad fruit we cannot expect by cultivation to change the character of the product. “Men do not gather grapes from thorns nor figs from thistles,” and no amount of culture and refinement expended on a thornbush or a thistle will give you anything else than thorns and thistles. The tree itself must be torn up by the roots and the new planted in its place. The first practical step among reformers is to secure unity of action. I think that one of the most deplorable effects of our competitive system is to be found in the relations which exist between the different schools of social reform. There are socialists, anarchists, single-taxers, populists, free-silverites, greenbackers, prohibitionists and a host of lesser varieties, all seeking to bring about better conditions among the mass of the people which w…
