---
title: "Dynamics Inherent to Protest Movements"
author: "I.M."
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/i-m-dynamics-inherent-to-protest-movements"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First appeared as Des dynamiques inhérents aux mouvements de contestation by I.M., March 2018 Translated for The Local Kids, Issue 4"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "i-m-dynamics-inherent-to-protest-movements.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/i-m-dynamics-inherent-to-protest-movements.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Context: a “historic” struggle        The forces involved        Myths put to the test: unity, horizontality, consensus        Chronicle of an ongoing bureaucratisation        Bureaucratisation from above        Bureaucratisation from below        Is this dynamic specific to the NDDL ZAD?        Territories in struggle and class struggle        A rebellion in the process of integration Acceptance and pacification: practical case: the D281 road        Delegation and negotiation        Legalisation and evictions        Integration of the rebellion        Conclusion? The eviction of conflictuality The reflections developed here are based on several months of being side-by-side on the ZAD [ Zone à Défendre ] of Notre-Dame-des-Landes [France]. They have also been elaborated collectively, which resulted in the organising of the “ off ” festival at the moment of the “ Fête de la victoire ” the 10th of February 2018 [at the time that the state announced that it will abandon the airport project]. The situation is so complex and evolving so quickly that trying to get an analysis into a few pages is a challenge. This is therefore only a partial and subjective point of view. This struggle has marked the imaginaries of a number of militants for a decade, especially since many images about its organisation were created from within the ZAD to turn it into a model struggle. It is also enticed by these images that we came to the ZAD to see more closely. We will try to propose some key points to understand what is happening in NDDL, but also in other struggles at the moment. After the announcement on the 17th of January 2018 of the abandonment of the NDDL airport project, by the Prime Minister, Edouard Philippe, many celebrated the victory after fifty years of more or less intense struggles. From a distance, this fight is seen as exemplary, firstly by its duration, and now also its “victorious” outcome. We will not talk about the reasons for this outcome, nor about the meaning that some give to this victory. Several texts talk about that [specifically: Mouvement où est ta victoire ? ]. As one occupant puts it, “The ZAD is used as a megaphone for practices and strategies of struggle that will be held up as examples for decades” [ The “Movement” is Dead, Long Live… Reform! , February 2018]. Let’s briefly recall the main forces involved. On the one hand, the citizenist components [ composantes ]: the Coordination des o ppo sa nts (which includes some sixty parties, labour unions and associations; the most present on the ground is the ACIPA), COPAIN (which includes mainly farmers, of which the most influential are members of the Conf é d é ration Paysanne , who do not live on the ZAD), the “historical” farmers organised in the ADECA (on the ZAD and did not sell their lands to VINCI [company that would build the airport]), the ecologists in struggle. These groups, although not homogeneous, have as their line of action addressing the State in a legal and rather juridical framework. These components were struggling against the airport. In 2009, at the call of some residents, young people came from different horizons: squatting, anti-authoritarian, autonomous, ecologist, or without political baggage. Looked upon with a suspicious eye at the beginning, they were finally accepted by the other components thanks to their determination facing the violence of the mobile gendarmes [militarised police forces] during the attempted eviction (Operation César in 2012). These occupants have added to the slogan “against the airport” of the ACIPA: and its world. About 200 support committees have also been created, often with the same differences as in the ZAD and the other components. Between the occupants, little by little, very marked scenes were formed. To simplify, we can speak of two modes of organisation underpinned by two visions of struggles: the anti-authoritarian and feminist on the one hand, and the autonomous [meaning the heirs to the Autonomous mo…
