---
title: "The Beast of Property"
author: "Johann Most"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/johann-most-the-beast-of-property"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on April 25, 2009 from www.eclipse.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "johann-most-the-beast-of-property.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/johann-most-the-beast-of-property.epub"
    hosted: false
---

“Among the beasts of prey man is certainly the worst.” This expression, very commonly made nowadays, is only relatively true. Not man as such, but man in connection with wealth is a beast of prey. The richer a man, the greater his greed for more. We may call such a monster the “beast of property.” It now rules the world, making mankind miserable. and gains in cruelty and voracity with the progress of our so called “civilization”. This monster we will in the following characterize and recommend to extermination. Look about ye! In every so-called “civilized” country there are among every 100 men about 95 more or less destitute and about 5 money-bags. It is unnecessary to trace all the sneaking ways by which they have gained their possessions. The fact that they own ALL, while the others exist, or rather vegetate merely, admits of no doubt, that these few have grown rich at the expense of the many. Either by direct brute force, by cunning, or by fraud, this horde has from time to time seized the soil with all its wealth. The laws of inheritance and entail, and the changing of hands, have lent a “venerable color to this robbery, and consequently mystified and erased the character of such actions. For this reason the “beast of property” is not fully recognized, but is, on the contrary, worshipped with a holy awe. And yet, all who do not belong to this class are its victims. Every off-spring of a non-possessor (poor man) finds every nook and corner the earth occupied at his entrance into the world. There is nothing which is “lordless.” Without labor nothing is produced; and in order to labor, there are required not only ability and will, but also room to work, tools, raw materials and means of sustenance. The poor man must, therefore, by force of necessity, apply to those who possess these things in plenty. And, behold! the rich give him permission to continue his existence. But in return for this he must divest himself of his skill and power. These qualities henceforth his pretended “saviors” use for themselves. They place him under the yoke of labor — they force him to the utmost of his mental and physical abilities to produce new treasures, which however he is not entitled to own. Should he desire to deliberate for long before making so unequal a contract, his growling stomach will soon convince him that the poor man has no time that, for there are millions in the same position as himself and he will risk that, while deliberating, hundreds of others will apply — his chance is gone and he again will be at the mercy of the winds. It is the lash of hunger which compels the poor man to submit. In order to live he MUST SELL — “VOLUNTARILY” SELL — HIMSELF every day and hour to the “beast of property.” The bygone times, when the “ruling” classes, on their slave-hunting raids, threw their victims in chains and forced them to work, of which the rulers had all the benefit — the times when christian-germanic robbers stole entire countries, deprived the inhabitants of the soil, and pressed them to feudal service, were indeed terrible enough, but the climax of infamy has been reached by our present “law and order” system, for it defrauded more than nine-tenths of mankind of their means of existence, reduced them to dependence upon an insignificant minority, and condemned them to self-sacrifice. At the same time it has disguised this relation with all sorts of jugglery so that the thralls of today — the wage slaves — but partially recognize their serfdom and outlawed position, they rather incline to ascribe it to the caprices of fortune. To perpetuate this state of affairs is the only aim of the “prominent” classes. Though not always united among themselves — one seeking to gain advantage over the other by tricks of trade, cunning in speculation and divers machinations of competition — yet in opposition to the proletariat they stand in one united hostile phalanx. Their political ideal is, therefore — in spite of all liberal phrases — a most po…
