---
title: "The Bureaucracy in Exile"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/iain-mckay-the-bureaucracy-in-exile"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Trotsky’s limited Anti-Stalinism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "iain-mckay-the-bureaucracy-in-exile.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/iain-mckay-the-bureaucracy-in-exile.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Before The New Course        The New Course        Platform of the Opposition        In Exile        The Revolution Betrayed        Reiterating Orthodoxy        International implications        To Conclude An article exploring Trotsky’s (limited) opposition to Stalinism and showing that it reflected Bolshevik orthodoxy in terms of advocating the dictatorship of the party and one-man management. Needless to say, almost all Trotskyist accounts fail to mention this. It first appeared in Black Flag Anarchist Review Vol. 3, No. 3 (Autumn 2023). This year marks the 100 th anniversary of Trotsky’s “New Course” articles which saw the beginnings of his opposition to developments within the USSR which led to the rise of Stalin, his exile in February 1929 and eventual assassination in 1940. [1] We can expect a raft of articles from what remains of the Trotskyist sects across the world marking the event and suggesting it represented more than it actually did. Here, we will clarify the nature of Trotsky’s opposition to Stalinism and debunk the exaggerations and selectiveness of previous hagiographies – not to mention the distortions and inventions. Trotsky’s “Left Opposition” of 1923–7 is undoubtedly the best known of the various dissident groupings within the Russian Bolsheviks which developed after 1917. This is mainly because it spawned numerous Trotskyist sects across the globe as well as the “Fourth International”. It is also the one most lauded by subsequent dissident Leninists – unsurprisingly, as earlier ones developed when Lenin and Trotsky held the reins and so are either ignored or dismissed in passing. [2] An American Trotskyist suggests that it was only “[a]fter Lenin’s death” that “the Russian Revolution’s goal of soviet democracy and the commitment to a liberating revolution worldwide gave way to a bureaucratic dictatorship under Joseph Stalin”. [3] Chris Harman likewise argued that it was after “Lenin’s illness and subsequent death” when the “principles of October were abandoned one by one.” He adds that “there was always an alternative to Stalinism. It meant, in the late 1920s, returning to genuine workers’ democracy and consciously linking the fate of Russia to the fate of world revolution.” The “historical merit of the ‘Left Opposition’” was that it “did link the question of the expansion of industry with that of working-class democracy and internationalism.” [4] Other Leninists make similar claims. Victor Serge, a member of the “Left Opposition” in Russia and then Trotskyist in exile, stated that its programme was “the reform of the Soviet State by a return to working-class democracy.” [5] Discussing attempts to rehabilitate Trotsky in the 1980s, Hillel Ticktin asserted that “[a]lthough the left opposition is history, a working-class critique is not, and the left opposition produced the first such critique.” [6] David McNally proclaims its importance in rousing rhetoric: Grouped around Leon Trotsky were the forces known as the ‘Left Opposition’… By the mid-1920s, the programme of the Left Opposition had two central planks. First, democracy had to be re-established in the Bolshevik party and in the mass organisations such as the trade unions and the soviets. Secondly, the Soviet government had to abandon all such retrograde notions as socialism in one country… During the terrible decades of the 1920s and 1940s when Stalin was committing barbarous crimes in the name of ‘socialism’, the lone voice of Leon Trotsky kept alive some of the basic elements of socialism from below… It was Trotsky’s great virtue to insist against all odds that socialism was rooted in the struggle for human freedom… Throughout the 1920s and until his death at the hands of Stalinist agent in 1940, Trotsky fought desperately to build a revolutionary socialist movement based on the principles of Marx and Lenin… Trotsky’s contribution to keeping alive the socialist flame during the 1930s… insured him a lasting place in the history of internatio…
