---
title: "Action and Organizational Work"
author: "Combat Organization of Anarcho-Communists"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-combat-organization-of-anarcho-communists-action-and-organizational-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "In Memory of Martyr Dmitry Petrov"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-combat-organization-of-anarcho-communists-action-and-organizational-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-combat-organization-of-anarcho-communists-action-and-organizational-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

While remembering the martyr Dmitry Petrov, who was killed on April 19, 2023 near Bakhmut, together with other internationalists, the fighters of his group, Finbar Cafferkey and Cooper Andrews, I would like to return to the article “To be an independent force”. This is one of the last programmatic texts of the Combat Organization of Anarcho-Communists, which Dima, in the middle of practical participation in the war and organizational activities, managed to write. And how was it written? It was November 2022, the town of Lyman. In the evening we returned from a not very successful assault on trenches near the recently liberated (and now newly occupied) village of Nevske on the border of Donetsk and Luhansk regions. There were no casualties in our platoon, but we failed to advance. And the next day, even before dawn, we will have to jump back on the armored APC and drive through the crossings on the Zherebets river which were shelled by Russian artillery. We will continue chewing through the defense of the occupants, which has been thoroughly fortified after mobilization. There were a few hours left to clean the weapon and sleep. And to surf the Internet, if there still was any energy. The Internet was also difficult. The platoon was scattered around Lyman, and Starlink and more or less regularly working electricity were available only in the commander’s house, which in combat conditions is quite reasonable. Going into the house itself, where radios and tablets were charging, unit actions were being planned, and meetings were being held, without a proper good reason was considered inappropriate. But fighters who used the Internet for personal needs could stay in the hallway. It was as dark and cold as it was outside. Actually in these conditions some of the texts and posts published on BOAK media resources during that period were written. Including a small programmatic article “To be an independent force”. Undoubtedly, in other conditions Dima could have developed the ideas expressed in it in much more detail. But he was not only an ideologist, but also a revolutionary in practice, acting in the conditions in which the current revolutionary struggle put him. And that is why the text was not very long, but meaningful, clear, concentrated, and at the same time could be read with pleasure – only Dima could formulate thoughts in such a way. The article begins with a quote from Makhno: in the previous weeks, Dima, looking for answers to the existential questions facing the post-Soviet anarchist movement, had time to reread Nestor Ivanovich’s memoirs during the short time he had left for rest. Some passages he quoted loudly and discussed with his comrades nearby. Dima’s own reflections were an analysis of reality, but they were partly inspired by the ideas of our outstanding predecessor, who had fought in roughly the same areas a century before us. What are these words of Makhno’s about? The great anarchist challenges the notion, widespread then and today, that anarchism as a social ideal has a place “only in the future and in unknown forms”. This protest of Nestor Makhno reflects an important component of Dima’s worldview. Dima believed that the goal of our struggle should be to achieve victory, nothing less. He himself talks about this in another important theoretical article that forms the ideological foundation of BOAK, “To be a Revolutionary. Today”: “We want to remind all pessimists that there are no “objective” reasons for considering the social revolution and the triumph of libertarian ideas to be a matter of an indefinitely distant future. The speed and unpredictability of social changes in the modern world teach us one important lesson: everything is possible. Including freedom and justice”. Yes, of course, there are many worthy comrades who will say: I understand the unattainability of the revolution during my lifetime, but for me this does not cancel the responsible approach to revolutionary work for the sake of those who …
