---
title: "Further thoughts on the question of crime"
author: "Errico Malatesta"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/errico-malatesta-further-thoughts-on-the-question-of-crime"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Umanità Nova, n. 134, September 16, 1921 Retrieved on March 4th, 2009 from dwardmac.pitzer.edu"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "errico-malatesta-further-thoughts-on-the-question-of-crime.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/errico-malatesta-further-thoughts-on-the-question-of-crime.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Letter from Aldo Venturini        Malatesta’s Reply Bologna, September 8, 1921 Dearest Malatesta, I read with great interest your two articles, recently appeared in Umanità Nova. , about the important and always worth discussing problem of crime. No doubt your arguments in support of the solution we anarchists give to the question are indisputably clear and effective. However, let me insist on some of your ideas, which solve some aspects of the problem, but do so in a way either too general and abstract or too particular. For example, you say: “For us the accomplishment of social duties must be voluntary, and one has a right to take a forcible action only against those who voluntary offend others and hinder a peaceful social coexistence. Force and physical constraint can only be used against a materially violent thrust, for sheer necessity of defence”. Going by the second part of your reasoning, it would almost look like only “a materially violent thrust” constitutes a violation of the justice principle that will be fundamental in the future society. Why force and physical constraint, although limited and inspired by the idea of a sheer necessity of defence, should not be used also in those cases (unfortunately these will be aspects of the moralizing crime of the new social environment) in which a serious damage can be still caused to one’s fellow men without exercising a “materially violent” act? Is not the act of exercising material violence upon a person, to rob him of some belonging, equivalent to the act of succeeding in the same robbing without using any violence whatsoever? Moreover, what is the difference between, say, someone who violently kills a fellow man and someone who drives him to die by exercising a criminal and shifty persuasion? The foregoing is just an example, not to say that hundreds of cases could be mentioned in which the offence, the damage to someone else’s life can happen without material violence. On the other hand, there are a right violence and a wrong violence. Therefore, the injustice does not lie so much in the external act that carries it out, as in the fact itself that someone has to suffer anyway by someone else’s nastiness and wickedness. On this topic you say: “We do not see any other solution than leave decisions in the hands of those concerned, in the hands of the people, i.e. the mass of citizens, which will act differently according to the circumstances and to their own varying degree of civilization” However, ‘people’ is too generic an expression here, hence the question remains unsolved. This kind of reasoning seems to repeat the error made by Kropotkine, according to whom the people is supposed to do everything, and for him the people is only a generic multitude. Saverio Merlino criticized very well this and other errors of Kropotkine’s idea of anarchism; and, arguing with you, he offers the following solution to the relevant problem of social defence in his book “Collectivist Utopia”: “Between the current system and the assumption that crime should cease, I believe there is room for intermediate forms of social defence that differ from a government function. Such social defence would be exercised under the people’s eyes and control in every place, as any other public service, like health, transportation, etc. and therefore it could not degenerate into an instrument of oppression and domination”. Why should not we anarchists reach this concept? We want to abolish the present machinery of so called justice, with all its painful and inhuman aspects, but we do not want to replace it with either individual liberty or the crowd’s summary judgement. The sense of justice of men needs to be improved, and the forms of expressing and defending it need to be worked out. I raised these modest objections to you, mainly to offer you the opportunity to come back to such an important topic, which needs to be discussed. Consider me always your loving Aldo Venturini The criticism of our friend…
