---
title: "The Contest for Memory: Haymarket Through A Revisionist Looking Glass"
author: "G. L. Doebler"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/g-l-doebler-the-contest-for-memory-haymarket-through-a-revisionist-looking-glass"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Fifth Estate #352, Winter 1999"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "g-l-doebler-the-contest-for-memory-haymarket-through-a-revisionist-looking-glass.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/g-l-doebler-the-contest-for-memory-haymarket-through-a-revisionist-looking-glass.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A Dreamscape of Contrasts        Patriotism and Benediction        An Anarchist Could Speak Last issue, the Fifth Estate announced a ceremony where the famed Haymarket Martyrs Monument in Chicago was to be declared a federally designated National Historic Landmark. Unknown to us, there had been intense agitation by local anarchists against this. G. L. Doebler attended the dedication ceremony and his report makes clear why the opposition was so intense. I went to Chicago on May 3 to attend the dedication of the Haymarket monument as a U.S. National Park Service Historic Landmark. The irony of a monument to executed anarchists being recognized as “historically significant” by the same government they so vehemently opposed was not lost on me. Still, I wanted to bear witness to the event as part of the long history of the Haymarket Affair, begun so long ago. On the drizzly night of May 4, 1886, a person still unknown threw a bomb into the ranks of Chicago police who were dispersing a street meeting of anarchists protesting police brutality against workers striking for the eight-hour day. Eight anarchists — Albert Parsons, August Spies, Adolph Pischer, Oscar Neebe, Louis Lingg, George Engel, Michael Schwab, and Samuel Fielden — were arrested, tried in a farcical trial, and convicted, even though it was proven that none of them was the actual bomb thrower. The prosecution freely admitted the defendants were convicted solely because of their political beliefs. Five of these men were condemned to death. While Lingg cheated the hangman by committing suicide, the other four, Parsons, Spies, Fischer, and Engel, were hung by the neck until dead. Neebe, Schwab, and Fielden were given stiff jail terms, but later pardoned by Illinois Governer John Altgeld. The judicial murders of the Chicago anarchists galvanized radicals all over the world. The names of many anarchists and even Communist Party functionaries who chose to be buried in the shadow of the Haymarket monument — Lucy Parsons, Emma Goldman, Voltarine de Cleyre, Ben Reitman, Harry Kelly, William Z. Foster, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn — evoke the memory of an entire generation of activists whose political eyes were opened by the Haymarket executions. In 1893, a monument was erected over the graves of the Haymarket martyrs by Pioneer Aid and Support Association, an organization whose purpose was to support the imprisoned anarchists and their families an to keep the memory of the fallen comrades alive. A beautiful and inspiring sculpture, it has served as a beacon for radicals around the world for generations. This was the long and venerable history I cam to share. It was also the history that the Illinois Labor History Society (ILHS) and the National Park Service were determined to suppress. Walking through the gates of Forest Home (formerly Waldheim) Cemetery that afternoon, it was like Alice through the Looking Glass. I was transported to a dreamscape of contrasts and contradictions, of irony and inverted truths. Rather than an accurate accounting of the historical significance of the Haymarket martyrs, the afternoon was a well-orchestrated imposition of historical revisionism, coldly calculated to make the martyrs acceptable to a middle-class trade unionism they would never have condoned. Like the monument itself, newly cleaned and refurbished for this dedication, the truth was similarly sanitized and refurbished for the occasion. Instead of the small group of anarchists and antiquarians I had experienced, I found three or four hundred trade unionists, Illinois Labor History Society (ILHS) members, and representatives of various authoritarian political parties, who, like lampreys attached to sharks, were busy peddling their papers. The site of the monument and surrounding graves was covered with a large, festively striped canopy, rows of folding chairs, and a stage. If it hadn’t been for the absence of ribs and the presence of communists, I’d have sworn I had walked into a Labor D…
