---
title: "Beyond the Scottish referendum"
author: "Mike Sabot"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mike-sabot-beyond-the-scottish-referendum-1"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 20th June 2022 from scotlandaf.wordpress.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mike-sabot-beyond-the-scottish-referendum-1.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mike-sabot-beyond-the-scottish-referendum-1.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       But smaller states are better and more democratic?        What about the Scottish Left?        The Nordic example        Renewing the struggle Contrary to earlier expectations, nationalism could not be utilized to further socialist aims, nor was it a successful strategy to hasten the demise of capitalism. On the contrary, nationalism destroyed socialism by using it for nationalist ends. [...] Unless socialism is altogether a mirage, it will rise again as an international movement — or not at all. In any case, and on the basis of past experience, those interested in the rebirth of socialism must stress its internationalism most of all. -Paul Mattick It’s less than one month to the Scottish independence referendum on 18 th September. I’m not going to tell you to vote or not vote. Some anarchists will abstain and focus on organising where they are, others will vote Yes in the hope of at least a few reforms. But if you do vote Yes, make it a wholly pragmatic choice – don’t buy into the ideology of the Yes campaign or its variant, left nationalism. Whatever the rhetoric of some on the Left, [1] this is a Scottish nationalist campaign, just as the No camp represents a British nationalism. Anyone who cares about class struggle politics needs to strongly oppose both. Nationalism, whatever form it takes, does two things: it tries to create a community of interest between the bosses and the working class; and it binds this community to the capitalist nation-state, reinforcing the latter’s power and role in exploitation. There is no genuinely ‘progressive’ form that this can take. We have, as Paul Mattick observed, a century of experience of national liberation struggles where apparently progressive anti-imperialist movements culminated in an oppressive new ruling class. And we could now potentially see a new wave of independence movements in Europe in response to neoliberal restructuring and the more immediate crisis of capitalism. Do we expect different results? New divisions and rivalries among European workers are not something to be applauded. Neither is the spectacle of a decidely bourgeois-led independence movement like that in Catalunya, where a more wealthy region seeks to stop ‘subsidising’ the rest of Spain. Well, if we were to take a critical look at actually existing small European states we find: that they’re certainly no more favourable to workers’ organising; they are also coercive (which is the role of any state apparatus) and can be just as authoritarian (an exceptional example being the role played by the Catholic church backed by the Irish state); they have been remarkably open to neoliberalism and austerity (which has had a devastating effect on small states from Finland to the Netherlands, nevermind southern Europe); there is a growing anti-immigrant trend related to systemic white supremacy across northern Europe; that some have also sent willing to send troops abroad (Denmark in Afghanistan) or have aided others who have (Ireland again, offering Shannon airport for use by the US Air Force); and they are always subject to the dictates of larger supranational structures and of capital itself. ‘When the people are being beaten with a stick, they are not much happier if it is called “the People’s Stick”.’ – Mikhail Bakunin The claim made both in the Yes campaign and on the Left that Scotland too can be a ‘normal democracy’, is an astounding attempt to ignore the obvious bankruptcy of representative democracy and its living critique in recent global social movements. Even if the Scottish government is for now less likely to introduce draconian measures like the Bedroom Tax or adopt an anti-immigration stance, this is not in any sense a static situation. Massive political-economic forces will be brought to bear on post-independent government policy – it will make cuts and it will use its borders in its own economic interests. Small states are more than capable of manufacturing consent or of over-ruling public opi…
