---
title: "Anarchist Influences on the Mexican Revolution"
author: "Jason Wehling"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jason-wehling-anarchist-influences-on-the-mexican-revolution"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2nd August 2020 from https://web.archive.org/web/20070608011509/http://flag.blackened.net/revolt/mexico/history/anarchism_1910.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jason-wehling-anarchist-influences-on-the-mexican-revolution.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jason-wehling-anarchist-influences-on-the-mexican-revolution.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Ricardo Flores Magon and the Partido Liberal Mexicano      1906: Strikes, Uprisings and the Beginning of the End of Porfiriato      Anarchism Emerges From the Liberals      The Biggest Obstacle: the United States Government      1911: the Liberation of Baja California      The Urban Centers and the Emergence of Anarcho-Syndicalism      Anarcho-Syndicalists and the Competing Government Factions      Anarcho-Syndicalism and Government: A Doomed Pact      The Case of Zapatismo: Agrarianism and Communalism      Anarcho-Syndicalism and Government: A Doomed Pact      The Case of Zapatismo: Agrarianism and Communalism      Libertarian-Municipalism and Anarchism      Zapata, Ricardo Flores Magon and Anarchism      Zapata: the Quasi-Anarchist      The Government Anarchists in the 1920s — the Ideal Wanes in Mexico.      An Evaluation: Anarchism in the Revolution “The dreamer is the designer of tomorrow. Practical men... can laugh at him; they do not know that he is the true dynamic force that pushes the world forward. Suppress him, and the world will deteriorate towards barbarism. Despised, impoverished, he leads the way... sowing, sowing, sowing, the seeds that will be harvested, not by him, but by the practical men of tomorrow, who will at the same time laugh at another indefatigable dreamer busy seeding, seeding, seeding.” -- Ricardo Flores Magon During the decades between 1910 and 1930, Mexico was swept into the maelstrom of revolution. Throughout this period, the ideology of Anarchism was a very strong force internationally. In fact, before the 1917 Russia Revolution, Anarchism was arguably a more significant radical force than Communism and the followers of Karl Marx. Anarchism literally means “no rulers”. The origins of Anarchism date back at least to the French Revolution and the Enrages. At the time, aristocrats labeled these libertarian radicals as “anarchists”. The first person to proclaim himself as such was French Socialist, Pierre Joseph Proudhon. At this time, Socialism was a term that encompassed a wide variety of anti-capitalist views. Anarchism gained recognition as distinct from Socialism, and later Communism, when Mikhail Bakunin openly broke with Karl Marx’s International Workingmen’s Association. The task of completing a coherent body of thought was left to the Russian Anarchist Peter Kropotkin, who envisioned a world of “anarchist-communism”. This idea was similar to Communism in that it was interested in evolving beyond private ownership of the means of production, but they disagreed over the idea of what that kind of society might look like and how they should get there. While the followers of Karl Marx, especially Lenin, argued for a strong state and a revolutionary vanguard which would crush the capitalists, the Anarchists wanted something much more libertarian. Anarchism is an ideology that fights for a world without the need for a state. Anarchists foresee a society where workers would manage themselves and the means of production is controlled by those who produced — directly, as opposed to capitalist or Communist Party managers. Politically, Anarchists strive for a decentralized system where power rests on the smallest possible unit, either with the individual or the community. From there, coordination on a larger scale is accomplished with confederation and the use of a delegate system. Nowhere in such a system would one person govern another — hence the name: Anarchism. During the period of the Mexican Revolution, Anarchism was a significant force in other parts of the world, such as in the Russian Revolution and later in Spain, 1936. Not surprisingly, Anarchism was a significant force in the Mexican Revolution as well. These ideas infiltrated the turbulent events in Mexico, through a variety of individuals, groups and organizations. Ricardo Flores Magon, whose remains rest at the Rotunda of Illustrious Men in Mexico City, was an outspoken advocate of Anarchism. His political organization with the c…
