---
title: "A Call for New Lines of Conflict"
author: "Tom Nomad"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-nomad-a-call-for-new-lines-of-conflict"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Confronting the Second Trump Era"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tom-nomad-a-call-for-new-lines-of-conflict.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-nomad-a-call-for-new-lines-of-conflict.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Protest and the Liberal State        Area Denial as Strategic Horizon        Bibliography Panic has started to set in. Over the past month we have watched as jackbooted immigration agents raid restaurants and drag children’s parents away. We have watched as the world’s richest and most arrogant man is given free reign to remake the conditions of our lives without any ability to push back. Above all, we are watching a much more organized attempt to seize and hold onto power than the vaguely planned out chaos of the first administration. For many, the situation feels hopeless. In the midst of all of this, we have a Left that is rudderless. The traditional approaches that they have to offer, passive marches, rallies, symbolic civil disobedience, are wholly and completely insufficient for the moment we are facing. Yet, even with this being the case, even with there being no direction forward within their approaches, we see the new generation of aspiring movement celebrities falling over one another for followers and likes. The loudest voices are also the ones running in no particular direction, with no particular goal except “resistance”, whatever that means within the narrow confines of activism. It is imperative that we prevent this from happening, that we prevent a retreat back to the staid tactics of the antiwar movement and progressive organizations. If we are to have any chance to not just defend our communities but to go on the offensive against tyranny, it is going to look very different than the vision marketed in feel-good Instagram posts. The game has changed, the terms are different, and the methods of mass activism, were not and, are not able to meet these changes. For us to start marking off new strategic lines of flight, we are going to need to understand exactly what it is that has changed. In our “normal” circumstance, where the liberal democratic state functions as such, it is an incredible form of political absorption. At its core liberal democracy exists as a political form, a container through which any statist politics can express itself. As Carl Schmitt discusses, [1] the liberal state functions as a medium through which politics can occur. Politics in the liberal democratic vision exists along the lines of rationalist discourse, and Parliament is the location of that discourse. All legitimate political action occurs in relation to this decision-making body and is an attempt to modify the functioning or decisions of that body. Liberal democracy creates a political form, with content that varies based on political discourse Liberal democratic theory assume a political form in which politics becomes reduced to discourse. Rather than open factional conflict, the political would exist within the framing of representative bodies, in which electoral majorities carry political power. The wager within this form is that dissent is tolerated, and even necessary for political multiplicity, as long as all parties abide by this, and the state itself maintains sovereignty and organizational cohesion. The location of political power is displaced to the state form, with the content that the state operates being variable, and with parties competing to capture the coercive policing apparatus to impose their respective program. [2] As a result, the liberal democratic state is able to grant concessions, both encouraging the protest form, which is firmly within control of the state, and decelerating the conflict that political dissent generates at the same time. Unlike ideological states, like North Korea, where the line between life and state of exception resides authoritarian agreement, in liberal democracy we cross over into the state of emergency, and are recognized as a legitimate threat to the state, only at the point when we refuse this discourse. Within liberal democratic forms disagreement is tolerated, and even encouraged, to the degree that it participates in reducing politics to discourse, which protest fundam…
