---
title: "About Freedom"
author: "Mikhail Bakunin"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mikhail-bakunin-about-freedom"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The idea of freedom put forward by Bakunin is much more interesting and exhaustive than that expressed by liberals. This contributes to make anarchy a more satisfactory, theoretical and practical, approach for all human beings. Source: Mikhail Bakunin, L’empire Knouto-Germanique et la Révolution Soc"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mikhail-bakunin-about-freedom.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mikhail-bakunin-about-freedom.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The idea of freedom by the liberals        The idea of freedom by the anarchists        The revolt against a God-master, the tyrannical State and a stifling Society The doctrinaire liberals, reasoning from the premises of individual freedom, pose as the adversaries of the State. They maintain that the government, i.e., the body of functionaries organized and designated to perform the functions of the State is a necessary evil, and that the progress of civilization consists in always and continuously diminishing the attributes and the rights of the States. Such is the theory, but in practice these same doctrinaire liberals, when the existence or the stability of the State is seriously threatened, are just as fanatical defenders of the State as are the monarchists and the Jacobins. Their adherence to the State, which flatly contradicts their liberal maxims, can be explained in two ways: in practice, their class interests make the immense majority of doctrinaire liberals members of the bourgeoisie. This very numerous and respectable class demand, only for themselves, the exclusive rights and privileges of complete license. The socio-economic base of its political existence rests upon no other principle than the unrestricted license expressed in the famous phrases laissez faire and laissez passer. But they want this anarchy only for themselves, not for the masses who must remain under the severe discipline of the State because they are “too ignorant to enjoy this anarchy without abusing it.” As a matter of fact, if the masses, tired of working for others, should rebel, the whole bourgeois edifice would collapse. Always and everywhere, when the masses are restless, even the most enthusiastic liberals immediately reverse themselves and become the most fanatical champions of the omnipotence of the State. In addition to this practical reason, there is still another of a theoretical nature which also leads even the most sincere liberals back to the cult of the State. They consider themselves liberals because their theory on the origin of society is based on the principle of individual freedom, and it is precisely because of this that they must inevitably recognize the absolute right of sovereignty of the State. According to them, individual freedom is not a creation, a historic product of society. They maintain, on the contrary, that individual freedom is anterior to all society and that all men are endowed by God with an immortal soul. The human being is accordingly a complete being, absolutely independent, apart from and outside society. As a free agent, anterior to and apart from society, he necessarily forms his society by a voluntary act, a sort of contract, be it instinctive or conscious, tacit or formal. In short, according to this theory, individuals are not the product of society but, on the contrary, are led to create society by some necessity such as work or war. It follows from this theory that society, strictly speaking, does not exist. The natural human society, the beginning of all civilization, the only milieu in which the personality and the liberty of man is formed and developed does not exist for them. On the one hand, this theory recognizes only self-sufficient individuals living in isolation, and on the other hand, only a society arbitrarily created by them and based on a formal or tacit contract, i.e., on the State. (They know very well that no state in history has ever been created by contract, and that all states were established by conquest and violence.) The mass of individuals of whom the State consists are seen as in line with this theory, which is singularly full of contradictions. Each of them is, considered on the one hand, an immortal soul endowed with free will. All are untrammeled beings altogether sufficient unto themselves and in need of no other person, not even God, for, being immortal, they are themselves gods. On the other hand, they are brutal, weak, imperfect, limited, and altogether sub…
