---
title: "An interview"
author: "Nikos Romanos"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nikos-romanos-an-interview"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From the Greek publication Hit&amp;Run, first translation to English by ​​​​​​​barbariantimes, printed by act for freedom now! &lt;web.archive.org/.../actforfree.nostate.net&gt;. Retrieved on 19/07/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nikos-romanos-an-interview.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nikos-romanos-an-interview.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Nikos Romanos was a model teenager, a good student from the bourgeoisie, son of a well-known novelist, until on December 6, 2008 he was involved in a traumatic event. His best friend, the young anarchist Alexandros Grigoropoulos (15 years) falls under the bullets of the police in the streets of Athens. Shot in the heart, he dies in his arms. This event leads to some of the most intense urban riots of the early 21 st century in the West, and Nikos is already there on the front line that same evening, enraged, dignified in the face of the media (total rejection), and respected by comrades despite his young age. To the rhythm of the backlash from the Greek anarchist movement, Nikos is forever changed by this experience, immediately throwing himself headlong into the anarchist struggle, until his arrest five years later after a double armed robbery in the Kozani region. He is tortured and accused of belonging to the Conspiracy of Cells of Fire (armed anarchist-nihilist organization), which he denies, whereas he takes responsibility for the robberies (and their need in order to spread anarchy). He and his five co-accused Giannis Michailidis, Dimitris Politis, Andreas-Dimitris Bourzoukos, Argyris Dalios et Fivos Charisis, maintain a confrontational attitude towards justice throughout, but Argyris Dalios and Fivos Charisis categorically deny ALL charges in relation to the Velventos case. However, on October 1 st 2014, they are all declared guilty of the robberies and each is sentenced to fifteen years’ prison. All six of them were acquitted of alleged involvement in the CCF. Nikos Romanos has also claimed responsibility for four incendiary actions. Tell us a little bit about what has happened concerning the academic leave of absence you have demanded within the new judicial framework after your hunger strike in NovemberDecember 2014. It goes like this: I completed 1/3 of the course as required by the new regulation and I made the request for educational leave. From that point on began the theater of the absurd. The prison board decided that the new regulation cannot be put into effect, it requires a joint ministerial decision and so it sent the request to the special appellate magistrate E. Nikopoulos, in line with the previous law. Nikopoulos issued a negative response because there is no ministerial decision and one cannot get into the merits of the application as the new judicial framework annuls and takes the place of the prior one. Based on the negative opinion of Nikopoulos, the Board rejected the leave request in its turn as the decision of the trial judge is binding. In light of this fait accompli , SYRIZA — which during the hunger strike concentrated on electioneering and brutal political exploitation on the backs of the people who made up the polymorphic solidarity movement — plays the role of Pontius Pilate, just like its predecessors. But of course this should come as no surprise since we are talking about politicians- that is to say, total bastards, political swindlers, opportunists, hypocrites and professional chameleons, who for a small time wore the costume of the humanist to serve certain political purposes. Of course there are more important reasons for that development, but I’ll keep this explanation for a later question. Concerning the progress of my case, theoretically speaking, there should be a ministerial decree to implement the new regulation, but I don’t think there is much possibility for that to happen. Do you think that behind the “delays” on the electronic monitoring wristband, there are political considerations or vindictive behavior directed against you? I believe that in this instance there is not even a really existing electronic monitoring wristband, because regardless of the claims of the Department of Justice, we who are in prison know that there is not a single prisoner in any prison in Greece who has been released in this way. Every day many prisoners come and ask me about this issue and they al…
