---
title: "Bakunin’s idea of revolution & revolutionary organisation"
author: "Andrew Flood"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/andrew-flood-bakunin-s-idea-of-revolution-revolutionary-organisation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This page is from Red &amp; Black Revolution (no 6, Winter 2002) Retrieved on 8th August 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "andrew-flood-bakunin-s-idea-of-revolution-revolutionary-organisation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/andrew-flood-bakunin-s-idea-of-revolution-revolutionary-organisation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Bakunin’s early life        Years in jail The Russian revolutionary liberal Alexander Herzen, who was a close friend of Micheal Bakunin, told a story of how when Bakunin was travelling from Paris to Prague he came across a revolt of German peasants “making an uproar around the castle, not knowing what to do. Bakunin got out of his conveyance, and, without wasting any time to find out what the dispute was about, formed the peasants into ranks and instructed them so skilfully that by the time he resumed his seat to continue his journey, the castle was burning on all four sides” . [1] Bakunin was the giant of the revolutionary movement in Europe from 1848 to his death in 1876. At 6’4” and 240lbs he was a literal giant as well as the demon that stalked the bourgeois imagination. Yet although he is often cited as the father of the anarchist movement, today his ideas of revolutionary organisation are poorly understood by anarchists and Marxists. Instead he is most remembered for his role in countering the authoritarian aspects of Marxism in the 1 st International. There are several good reasons why Bakunin is not remembered for his positive ideas. The years Marx spent in the British Library perfecting Das Kapital were spent by Bakunin in a series of prisons, chained to walls, and losing his teeth through scurvy. Not the best environment for research or writing! And in any case as he admitted in 1870 “I am neither a scientist, nor a philosopher nor even a professional writer. I have written very little in my life time, and have only ever done so in self-defence” . [2] In fact he wrote thousands of letters but relatively few articles or pamphlets. Many of those available today are drafts of unpublished works. Also he never claimed any consistency to his life’s writings or activity. Even in 1871, when he and Marx were fighting over the future of the First International, he could write “As far as learning was concerned, Marx was [in 1844] , and still is, incomparably more advanced than I. I knew nothing at that time of political economy, I had not yet rid myself of my metaphysical observations .... He called me a sentimental idealist and he was right;....” . [3] Many Marxists came to see Marx as a sort of prophet whose writings comprise a perfect materialist ‘revelation’ that can be used to answer all of today’s questions. This may be a foolish approach but it’s true to say that Marx’s life’s writings are more consistent than Bakunin’s are. The writings of the young Bakunin have quite different politics to his writings at the end of his life. Bakunin followed a similar path of development to many of the other revolutionaries from a bourgeois background of that generation. Like Marx and Engels this included involvement with the left Hegalians. In 1844 he was a member of Marx’s Democratic Federation in Paris where he also met and was influenced by Proudhon. When the 1848 revolutions (which centred on the demand for bourgeois parliaments and home rule) erupted, he served in the Workers’ National Guard in Paris. When that rising was defeated he headed to Germany in March as the revolutions there started, hoping to encourage a Polish revolt. Bakunin’s political ideology at the time was fairly unformed but is usually described as ‘Pan Slavist’. Many commentators since have had problems putting this in any sensible context. Anarchists have tended to see it as irrelevant, while Marxists have generally concentrated on attacking Bakunin for the anti-German (Prussian) aspect to it. His writings and activity in this period bear more then a passing resemblance to what has been called left republicanism in Ireland. The idea that the ‘national struggle’ can be an impetus towards the abolition of class rule even as it achieves national independence is also found in many Marxist writings, including those of Connolly and Trotsky. His anti-German rants are echoed much later in the anti — US diatribes of Marxist South American revolutionaries who, s…
