---
title: "Dave Kerin on Workers’ Cooperatives and the Climate Emergency"
author: "Dave Kerin, Collective Action"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-affinity-dave-kerin-on-workers-cooperatives-and-the-climate-emergency"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The Platform Issue 3 — Spring 2014. Retrieved on March 11, 2021 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarchist-affinity-dave-kerin-on-workers-cooperatives-and-the-climate-emergency.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-affinity-dave-kerin-on-workers-cooperatives-and-the-climate-emergency.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Dave Kerin is a co-founder of the Earthworker Cooperative in Morwell, Victoria, which is building a network of democratically owned and managed cooperatives throughout Australia to manufacture clean energy technology. Sam spoke with him at Trades Hall. What is the Earthworker Cooperative? The Earthworker Cooperative facilitates and enables the establishment of other workers’ cooperatives in Australian, with a focus on manufacturing new green technologies for supply locally. Eureka’s Future is one of the enterprises within that, manufacturing solar products. It started with manufacturing the BOLT-ON solar heat pump, which renters can bolt-on and bolt-off when they leave. It used to be made in China but we won the rights to make it here, along with stainless steel tanks, which are entirely made here by us. There are other products, an evacuator tube solar system, solar ventilators and so on, which we also won the rights to make here. The point of Eureka’s Future is to control the spaces where we work and where we live. All workers make decisions democratically and own the enterprise collectively. The Australian service sector is now eighty percent of the economy. In Greece it was at sixty percent before its collapse. We’ve allowed capitalism to build our lives on exploitation and on sand. It will wash away at the first sign of real crisis. We have to put those jobs back in place. Capitalism is saying we can’t do it, the state is not going to do it, so that leaves us with one class: that’s us, the working class. Earthworker is one aspect of that. Regardless of a person’s worldview, how they define themselves, they can join Earthworker if they support the outcomes we’re trying to achieve. How do the workers who are involved react to being in control of their workplace and democratically managing their own work? Well, at Eureka’s Future we’re just getting started, so it’s a scary time. October-November is when we mutualise Everlast, which was the private company. And the workforce are only just coming over to the cooperative structure. At this point, we begin a process of them not only becoming worker-owners, but also a process of education, that Borderlands Cooperative is assisting us with. Where we as a group of workers learn what it is to run our workplace. We learn about group dynamics and group decision-making, conflict resolution at work, how do we deal with power. Other things: how do we deal with hazards, toxicity, and so on. The Earthworker Cooperative has been a success, but also a lot of hard work. What have been the major challenges in building the cooperative and what challenges might new worker cooperatives face more generally? I guess the biggest challenge has been the cultural shift in the organised labour movement and the green movement over the past two decades. Workers are encouraged to be individualised, to reject trade unions and anything to do with cooperation. Meanwhile, due to a variety of factors, the labour movement has been separated from the environmental movement. We’re trying to reverse that shift by talking about jobs and the environment, not jobs versus the environment. The latter strategy has been tried and it failed miserably. Not only workers, but it has failed the planet. So we’re taking a class approach to the climate. We emphasise that capitalism is causing the climate emergency. To march in the streets asking capitalism to get a heart transplant and get out of the Big Four — fossil fuel, petrochemical, plastics and the military — is impossible, when capitalism is totally and utterly dependent on those industries. I mean, the military is the largest industry in the world, by half, and the largest producer of greenhouse gas emissions. Capitalism is bound to it. If you look at the Middle East, it is about controlling oil and resources as they decline, but it’s also about directly serving the military-industrial complex. That’s how much of a systemic crisis we’re facing. So unless we want to get g…
