---
title: "Economic Policy from Below"
author: "Warren McGregor"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/warren-mcgregor-economic-policy-from-below"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "an Anarchist Critique of the COSATU Unions’ “Radical Reform” Project"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "warren-mcgregor-economic-policy-from-below.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/warren-mcgregor-economic-policy-from-below.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Radical Reform (RR) as Economic Policy-from-Below        Defining Radical Reform (RR)        The Assumptions of Radical Reform (RR)        Challenges and Shortcomings        The Global and Local Context        Decline in Union Power        Problems Internal to the Radical Reform (RR) Project        Conclusion Whereas many union movements in the world entered the 1990s in a state of political crisis, South African unions not only continued to grow very rapidly – the South African union movement was among the five fastest growing union movements in the world at the time – but also developed an alternative policy framework that bucked the neoliberal trend. Centred on the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), and within it, key unions like the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA), the unions developed an ideological and strategic orientation described by scholars (e.g. Eddie Webster and Glenn Adler, 2000) as “radical reform” or “structural reform.” The thinking of the main unions in South Africa remains, to this day, profoundly shaped by the “radical reform” (RR) model. The aim of this input is to examine the RR model, which was an attempt to build on the many key progressive gains won by workers and their organisations through struggle in the 1980s, and push through to a deeper transformation in the 1990s. This input defines the key components of RR, and then examines why this innovative response to the parliamentary transition and to capitalist globalisation was not successful. This requires looking at issues of neoliberal capitalist and state domination, the impact of RR on the unions, and the effects of the institutionalisation of trade union activity and dispute processes that have taken place. It raises deeper questions about the unions’ politics as well. Therefore, this section provides some ideas on: Briefly defining radical reform and noting the assumptions on which the concept is based. The historical and ideological-strategic contexts influencing the development of the approach. The challenges and shortcomings of RR. RR came from the COSATU unions , not the ANC or SACP, and was a strategic trade union and working-class approach to socio-economic transformation of newly-democratic South Africa and the role that organised labour would play in this transformation. It was developed in the fires of struggle against late apartheid and capitalism in South Africa by COSATU and its affiliates and can confidently be considered an example of economic policy development from below that was developed through engagements with the ideas and desires of the rank-and-file in conversation with their elected leaders and officials. Locally, the black working-class majority and its organisations were defeating the last vestiges of apartheid and racist capitalism, and engaging the newly developing institutions of a democratic South Africa. These struggles had incubated the development of powerful and militant working-class organisations, keenly aware of their power and historical role and responsibility. At the dawn of the 1990s, COSATU entered into a formal alliance with the ANC. There was then a mighty, radical, mass-based and street-mobilising working class, closely linked to what was then a radical nationalist party, ANC, which was on the verge of state, power, as well as allied to the fastest growing communist party in the world at that time, the SACP. According to the labour scholars Webster and Adler, writing in 2000, radical reform (RR) is a “left version of social democracy.” [1] Social democracy is the idea that the working class can win the existing state, using means like parliament, corporatism and expanded state control of the economy to shift society towards socialism through a series of reforms. A social democratic party is usually a mass party, as it needs maximum numbers to win elections. What makes RR a “left” version of social democracy is that it was driven by mass, radical unions, who …
