---
title: "Before AL: the UTCL from tendency to network"
author: "Théo Rival"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theo-rival-before-al-the-utcl-from-tendency-to-network"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Article published in Alternative libertaire, N°207 — June 2011. Translation by FdCA-International Relations Office. Retrieved on 10th December 2021 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "theo-rival-before-al-the-utcl-from-tendency-to-network.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theo-rival-before-al-the-utcl-from-tendency-to-network.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       “Another little group!” (1976–1982)        An “Involuntary Bakuninist Alliance” (1982–1991) One of the most important factors in the birth of Alternative Libertaire (AL) was the Union des Travailleurs Communistes Libertaires (UTCL — Union of Libertarian Communist Workers). This organization, which lasted for 17 years, had made strenous efforts to maintain a libertarian orientation in the class struggle of its day. But before becoming an organization as such, the UTCL was a tendency with the Organisation Révolutionnaire Anarchiste (ORA — Anarchist Revolutionary Organization) [1] . In the wake of 1968, the ORA had attracted numerous young people who were put off by the Leninist, Trotskyist and Maoist organizations. If we must characterize the political project of the ORA, let’s say it sought to build an organization for “workers’ anarchism”. To references to Marxism increasingly accepted there was added a desire to be involved in labour, which resulted in the publication of bulletins for various industrial sectors. Two of them were to last for some time: “Le Rail enchaîné” [2] at the national railway compny SNCF, and “Le Postier affranchi” [3] at the Post Office. Animated by young employees, they were witness to what, in the eyes of some, was the ORA’s best point. On the other hand, while hopes of an imminent revolution faded, the majority of the ORA began an evolution that would lead it to break with this workerist approach in preference for the sort of movementism preferred by the Italian autonomists. 1974 saw big strikes by bank workers, in the post office and the SNCF, three sectors where the ORA had militants. For those who were behind “Le Postier affranchi”, the case was clear: they had to be part of the mass struggles, supporting them through union work which must be part and parcel of the work of revolutionaries. They were joined in this analysis by others, in particular railway workers. A militant nucleus was formed, which would become formalized into the Tendance pour une Union des Travailleurs Communistes Libertaires [4] . The struggle of the tendency within the ORA did not last long, given their differing strategies and organizational ideas. At the Orléans congress in April 1976, the UTCL minority was expelled and the majority of the ORA took the new name Organisation Communiste Libertaire (OCL — Libertarian Communist Organization). The first issue of “Tout le pouvoir aux travailleurs” [5] , official journal of the UTCL, was already at the printers, the somewhat ironical headline being “Another little group!”. The break is completed with the OCL, which moves in a more anti-syndicalist direction, while the “Basic Principles” passed by the 1 st Congress of the UTCL in 1978 require militants to be members of the CGT or the CFDT [6] . The members of the UTCL devote a large part of their work essentially to the CFDT, which was in favour of self-management). Bulletins in various industrial sectors multiplied, with varying formats and regularity: “Le Postier affranchi” in the post office, “Le Court-circuit” in Électricité de France [7] , “L’Éclateur” [8] in Air-France and “Cheminots en lutte” [9] in SNCF. But the young organization soon had to deal with the economic crisis and the crisis in activism. The early 1980s heralded a period of decline in the struggles. May 1968 was a long way away and most of the far left was going downhill. What was the UTCL’s strong point — being rooted amongst the workers and the choice of union work as the everyday alternative to rampant individualism — was also its weakness. In effect, it was difficult for the UTCL to build “the workers’ organization for libertarian communism” when it had not reached a critical mass of members, and when among those there were so many who had received union mandates from their workmates which they could not decently refuse. But this did not prevent the UTCL from engaging in specific tasks, such as support work for workers in Eastern Europe. This would c…
