---
title: "Angiolillo’s Vengeance"
author: "Solidaridad Obrera"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/solidaridad-obrera-angiolillo-s-vengeance"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From El Solidario, August ’98, organ of the Solidaridad Obrera group in Spain. Translated by Paul Sharkey. Retrieved on 24th September 2020 from https://www.katesharpleylibrary.net/kkwj4b"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "solidaridad-obrera-angiolillo-s-vengeance.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/solidaridad-obrera-angiolillo-s-vengeance.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Montjuich Trial        The Restoration Regime        Angiolillo Face To Face With Canovas On 20 August 1897, the Italian anarchist Michele Angiolillo Lombardio was garrotted to death in Vergara, Spain. He was 36 years old and just a few days earlier he had killed the Spanish prime minister Antonio Canovas del Castillo in the spa town of Santa Agueda, capitalising upon an oversight on the part of the police escort. We have few details about Angiolillo. We know that he was from Naples and entered Spain from France, coming from Marseilles in 1897. Previously he had been living in England and it was probably there that he met the Spanish anarchist refugees who would have filled him in on the situation of the anarchist movement in their homeland, especially as regards the most active elements at the time, the Catalans. The engineer Tarrida del Marmol’s book, Inquisitors of Spain , had just been published. The author, having fled to England, offered a first hand account of the so-called Montjuich trial which had followed the bombing of the Corpus Christi procession in Barcelona in 1896. A bomb had been thrown at the procession — not, oddly enough at the dignitaries leading it but at the body of the procession — and five workers and a policeman had been killed. This curious circumstance, plus the fact that the actual perpetrator was never identified led to suspicions of a set-up or connivance on the part of the police themselves, a much more likely story than most might be inclined to believe. In any event, hundreds of arrests ensued and the matter was used as an excuse to put the anarchists on the rack. The aim was to indict some of the leading ideologues still at liberty, Tarrida del Marmol among them. Later, in his book, he would tell of the awful tortures to which the accused were subjected in the Montjuich fortress to extract phoney confessions. The upshot of the trial was that lengthy prison sentences were handed down and five anarchist militants were executed by firing squad. In only one case was there a hint of possible involvement in the preparations for the bombing. The other four were completely innocent. The First Republic having foundered due to military intervention, the Bourbon restoration established by Canovas del Castillo (endorsed by Isabella II, Maria Cristina and Alfonso XII, one after another) put paid to a pre-revolutionary situation and ushered in unprecedented stability, thanks to rotation in power of the conservatives (led by Canovas) and the liberals (led by Sagasta), both of them recognising the authority of the monarchy. That stability which favoured big business and shady deals served the interests of the landowning oligarchy and superior officers in the military. Their chief enemy (given, as well, the dithering and limp character of incipient marxist socialism) was anarchism: Not just on account of sporadic and controversial outrages, which many anarchists condemned, but because of the certain fact that the anarchist movement was growing in influence every day and that at all costs situations such as has occurred before where the anarchists fomented and led strikes, revolts and popular disturbances (as in Alcoy, Jerez, Cadiz, Barcelona, etc.) had to be averted. The position in Andalusia where hunger was an endemic problem might turn explosive again and any disturbances were put down at gunpoint and with mass arrests, not to mention recourse to the ley de fugas [shot ‘trying to escape’]. During this time, paradoxically, as Gerald Brenan puts it ‘every Civil Guard turned into a recruiting- sergeant for anarchism.’ In 1896 a new law was promulgated: it was designed specifically to crack down on anarchism. As if that were not enough, the response to the pro-independence agitation in the Spanish colonies took the form of carte blanche being given to the most reactionary among the military. In the Philippines, a revolt had been ruthlessly quashed and among those mown down was the most popular leade…
