---
title: "Crass and Class War in the Thatcher years, by an ex-member of Bristol Class War"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/an-ex-member-of-bristol-class-war-crass-and-class-war-in-the-thatcher-years-by-an-ex-member-of"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in KSL: Bulletin of the Kate Sharpley Library No. 91–92, October 2017 [Double issue] Retrieved on 19th May 2021 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "an-ex-member-of-bristol-class-war-crass-and-class-war-in-the-thatcher-years-by-an-ex-member-of.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/an-ex-member-of-bristol-class-war-crass-and-class-war-in-the-thatcher-years-by-an-ex-member-of.epub"
    hosted: false
---

I come from a Labour Party family in a town by a huge American base. Anti-Cruise demos got twenty thousand people out, across classes. We were all going to die, after all. In 1981 Crass hit me. It stripped away lots of bullshit. A lot of people come through that route. It stripped it all back, beyond what CND were saying. What, nukes are bad but napalm’s OK? And you start to look at how war and the state work. Crass really had influence and penetration into working class circles. People often want to use culture to get that sort of penetration but Crass did it. They were very influential. Look at all the people about, aged 48–55, with Crass tattoos. Builders, whatever. 1984 is the split year (in the South West). Spring 1984 is key: Crass were found out a bit. Crass started to be criticised in 1983. And then that criticism coincides with the Miners’ strike. Plus you get Stop The City. The movement goes from cultural resistance and “social centre” type activity (not that we had the term then) to “Let’s attack the City”. It goes from single-issue politics to attacking capitalism. But the cultural stuff, the punk identity, becomes a contradiction. Why does everyone want to look different from everyone else who lives round them? Why am I supposed to look like this? In 1983, ’84 there are debates in Bristol and a massive split. Not the most bitter split, people still talked to each other, but a split. Some people were saying “The miners are sexist, the miners eat meat” – lets hide away from all that. Others remembered recent history, they remembered 1974 [Heath’s defeat by the miners]. “This is IT! Fuck gigs, fuck all the cultural stuff, we have to support the miners directly.” And we went to Wales, we went to the power stations. Class was a major element of the split. Working class people were saying “you hate us, you don’t want us”. Class War were saying exactly the same thing. [Class politics was on the rise:] Virus appeared at this time [which became the Anarchist Communist Federation], Wildcat , the DAM [Direct Action Movement], bits of the ultraleft (like the bloke who did Miner conflicts, major contradictions ), the situationists. We sold Class War and read Virus . We sold Class War and Wildcat to the left. We were reading Black Flag . We split from the lifestyleists, from the social centre, alternative music scene. That music/cultural scene, we felt it doesn’t matter any more. Some of us rejected it, went back to dress like their mates did. But that “Punk versus everything else”, we moved out of it. That was part of getting politicised. Class War was powerful. The lifestylists were saying “They’re fascists”. Bristol Class Struggle Anarchists, in ’84 or ’85 rang Vera Krushik of Brixton, of 121 Bookshop. Vera, who was Jewish, said “these people don’t know what fascists are.” Vera knew my mum through the Older Feminist Network, and sent me Crowbar and the original “Riot not to work” leaflet. Andy Dewar from Glasgow was ex-Communist Party. He became a situationist. He re-educated us. He’d tried to get the Sex Pistols to play Brockwell Park. He told us, “you’re gold dust. Don’t let anyone bullshit you.” Vera and Andy said: Ian Bone and Martin Wright, their politics are really good. After Orgreave Crass put out a statement saying half the group had renounced pacifism. But by that time, it didn’t really matter to us what they said. We were getting a political education, racing through it. People think Class War was just thick people, or just a game, or that they were all mouth: No. They were definitely the most influential ultra-left group or class struggle anarchist group. By 1986 we were council communists. Who supported us when Class War were suspended from AFA [after Searchlight/Guardian smears in 1986]? The DAM, Red Action, The ACF. The rest were our enemies. We didn’t bother with the anarchist scene. We went where the Left wouldn’t go, onto the estates. There were already people selling Class War in Bristol: Scooter kids, Bar…
