---
title: "Bolivia: The Extreme Right Takes Advantage of a Popular Uprising"
author: "Raúl Zibechi"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/raul-zibechi-bolivia-the-extreme-right-takes-advantage-of-a-popular-uprising"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "In the following translated article by Raúl Zibechi, the long-time Uruguayan militant and analyst of social movements in Latin America, the author adopts the position that the resignation of Evo Morales was the outcome of his government marginalizing and repressing the very social movements that had"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "raul-zibechi-bolivia-the-extreme-right-takes-advantage-of-a-popular-uprising.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/raul-zibechi-bolivia-the-extreme-right-takes-advantage-of-a-popular-uprising.epub"
    hosted: false
---

What caused the fall of the government of Evo Morales in Bolivia is an uprising by the people of Bolivia and their organizations. Their movements demanded his resignation before the army and police did. The Organization of American States sustained the government until the bitter end. The context for what is taking place in Bolivia didn’t start with electoral fraud, rather it began with systematic attacks by the government of Evo Morales and Álvaro García Linera against the same popular movements that brought them to power, to the point that when they needed the movements to defend them, the movements were deactivated and demoralized. The social mobilization and the refusal of movements to defend what in another moment they considered to be “their” government was what precipitated Morales’ resignation. That is made clear by the declarations by the Workers’ Central of Bolivia (COB), the teachers and authorities of the Public University of El Alto (UPEA), and dozens of other organizations, including Mujeres Creando, which has been perhaps the clearest of all. The Latin American left appears unable to accept that a considerable segment of popular movements demanded the resignation of the government, because they can’t see beyond the leaders ( los caudillos ). The declaration of the Union Federation of Mine Workers of Bolivia (FSTMB), an organization that is close to the government, provides a clear example of what is felt from many within organizations: “President Evo, you have already done a lot for Bolivia, you improved education, health, and brought dignity to many poor people. President, do not allow your country ( el pueblo ) to burn, and don’t allow more deaths, president. The people will respect you for the position you have to take, your resignation is inevitable, compañero president. We must leave the national government in the hands of the people.” This sad outcome has precedents that go back, in a short version, to the march in defense of the Isiboro-Sécure Indigenous Territory and National Park (TIPNIS) in 2011. After that massive action, the government began to divide the organizations that convened the march. Morales and García Linera maintained excellent relations with the business class as they created a coup against the National Council of Ayllus and Markas of Qullasuyu (CONAMAQ) and the Confederation of Indigenous Peoples of Bolivia (CIDOB), two historic Indigenous organizations. They sent in the police, kicked out legitimate leaders, and then sent in new leaders that close to the government under police protection. In June of 2012, the CIDOB denounced “government meddling with the aim of manipulating, dividing and affecting the organic and representative organizations of the Indigenous peoples of Bolivia.” One group of dissidents, with support from the government, refused to recognize the authorities and convened an “expanded commission” to elect new authorities. In December of 2013, a group of dissidents linked to the Movement Towards Socialism (MAS) within the CONAMAQ took over their offices, and beat and removed those who were there, with help from the police. They remained there so as to impede access by the legitimate authorities who wished to recuperate their headquarters. The communiqué of the CONAMAQ said that the coup against them was so that the organization would “approve all of the policies against the Indigenous movement and the Bolivian people without anyone saying anything.” On February 21, the government itself convened a referendum so that the people could vote on the possibility of a fourth re-election for Morales. Regardless of the fact that the majority voted NO, the government plowed ahead with plans for re-election. Both of these actions, disregarding popular will and the removal of the legitimate leaders of social movement organizations, were coups against the people. But it gets worse yet. On the morning of Wednesday, November 17, 2017, days before the referendum on re-election, a demons…
