---
title: "The Future of Insurrection"
author: "Lupus Dragonowl, Dragonowl"
date: "2016"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lupus-dragonowl-the-future-of-insurrection"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Anarchy: Journal of Desire Armed 70/71 and 72/73"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lupus-dragonowl-the-future-of-insurrection.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lupus-dragonowl-the-future-of-insurrection.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Section 1: The composition of insurrection        What is insurrection?        Just-in-time repression        The experience of the excluded and the right to be angry        Insurrection and band societies        Networks and the everyday        Place      Section 2: The power of insurrection        Asymmetrical conflict        Raising costs        Analysing summit protests        Hitting the infrastructure of power        Blocking nodes        Invisibility        Fraternising and decomposing the state        Rules of engagement        Sustaining Insurrection        Local knowledge      Section 3: Dangers to insurrection        Strategies of tension        Moral panics        The danger of massacre        The danger of state conspiracy        Recuperation        In place of a conclusion: crisis The goal of any insurrection is to become irreversible. It becomes irreversible when you’ve defeated both authority and the need for authority — The Invisible Committee The catastrophe is not coming, it is here. We are already situated within the collapse of a civilization. It is within this reality that we must choose sides. To no longer wait is... to enter into the logic of insurrection — The Invisible Committee It’s enough just to say what is before our eyes and not to shrink from the conclusions — The Invisible Committee What strategies and orientations can develop insurrectionary anti-politics into a movement actually able to destroy global capitalism? This is the question taken up by The Coming Insurrection , as well as by author such as Bonanno. I aim here to use insights from The Coming Insurrection to open onto discussions of various aspects of the future of insurrection. The purpose will be to think through strategic implications of attempting to use a mainly expressive form of action for strategic purposes, and ways to deal with the obstacles faced in the process. But first of all, what is insurrection? Insurrection differs from revolution in being an attack on the existence of state power, rather than a seizure of such power. It follows in the tradition of Walter Benjamin’s idea of ‘law-destroying violence’, which is directed against the capability for use violence to make or preserve laws. It is not instrumental violence to subordinate others, but rather, exists beyond the mythology of statist violence, destroying the power of death for the sake of the living. Bonanno’s theory of insurrection relies on a concept of social war, which refers to an irreducible antagonism between included and excluded. Insurrection for Bonanno involves the rejection of alienation, especially of subordination to production, and involves both an affirmation of life and desire and assault on the structures of power. ‘Unfortunately civil war is an obligatory road which must be passed in any historical moment of profound, radical transformation’. Yet it must also be playful, generating excitement and a sense of empowerment against the social system as death-machine. Insurrection pits active force against reactive force, and is the point of explosion of accumulated discontent. It is fundamentally connected to non-renunciation, the refusal to compromise on desire. It is thus connected to an active, affirmative type of desire. It is also fundamentally connected to affinity-networks and bands, as opposed to organisations. It most often arises from standpoints of exclusion or marginality, as opposed to those which are included but exploited. Insurrection has at least three political components. It has an affective or expressive component: attacks which respond to indignity and violation, which are psychologically liberating and inspiring. It has a strategic component: it imposes costs on repressive or oppressive forces, and serves to carve out spaces of autonomy by altering the balance of forces. And it has a prefigurative component, with each act of insurrection pointing towards and attempting to produce in the present a total insurrection resultin…
