---
title: "Anarchism in Mexico"
author: "Chuck Morse"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/chuck-morse-anarchism-in-mexico"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Morse, Chuck. “Anarchism, Mexico.” In The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest: 1500 to the Present, edited by Immanuel Ness, 137–139. Vol. 1. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "chuck-morse-anarchism-in-mexico.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/chuck-morse-anarchism-in-mexico.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       References And Suggested Readings Anarchist roots in Mexico date back to the 1860s, when a small group of radical intellectuals embraced the doctrine. Greek immigrant Plotino Rhodakanaty, often considered the father of Mexican anarchism, was particularly important to the initial spread of the ideology, as was the Gran Círculo de Obreros de México, a workers’ association founded in the Federal District in 1870. Fanned by escalating labor unrest, and a radicalization in the liberal opposition to the government, anarchists helped to lay the organizational and intellectual foundations of Mexico’s growing revolutionary movement. Ricardo Flores Magón was the most prominent anarchist during the first decade of the twentieth century. He, together with his Liberal Party of Mexico (Partido Liberal Mexicano, PLM), mounted the only serious opposition to Porfirio Díaz’s government at the time. Organized in a network of Liberal Party “clubs” that were distributed throughout Mexico and in parts of the United States, the Magonists contested the legitimacy of the dominant regime, mobilized workers to challenge its economic foundations, and tried desperately to ignite the revolution. A dedicated journalist, playwright, and publisher, Magón railed against the government’s authoritarianism and hypocrisy in a prodigious stream of texts. His newspapers, El Hijo del Ahuizote and Regeneratión , were major instruments in his battle against the state and had genuine mass appeal: for instance, the former had a circulation of 24,000 in 1904 and the latter reached 30,000 readers in 1906, despite being officially banned. These publications were one source of his repeated incarcerations as well as his 1903 flight to the United States, where he remained for the rest of his life. On the economic terrain, the PLM organized strikes in vital parts of the national economy, such as in the copper mines in Cananea and in the textile industry in Puebla, Veracruz, Tlaxcala, Querétaro, Jalisco, and the Federal District. These strikes cultivated working-class militancy and made exploitation a matter of public debate. The Cananea strike was remarkable for its anti-imperialist content: the mines were American-owned and, as a result, the strike forced Díaz to choose between yielding to the workers’ demands or acting against them on behalf of an American capitalist. He chose the latter, which inflamed doubts about his fidelity to the fatherland. The PLM also launched multiple insurrections against the regime. In 1906, when a leading Magonist, Práxedis Guerrero (1882–1910), had 46 guerilla units under his command, they participated in uprisings in Coahuila, Tamaulipas, and Veracruz. In 1908, they staged armed revolts in Viesca (Cohuila), Las Vacas (today Ciudad Acuña, Coahuila), and Casas Grandes and Palomas (Chihuahua). In 1911, Magonists seized Tijuana, which they declared a socialist republic before being routed. An ambiguity about PLM goals compromised its chances of success. The party’s 1906 “Program” was a liberal document that called for constitutional reforms, such as limiting the president’s term to four years; the institution of an eight-hour working day; improvements in education; and other, non-revolutionary demands. However, the PLM also had a radical wing, led by Magón himself. Magón, who had grown increasingly – though privately – dedicated to anarchism, hoped to galvanize and lead the resistance to the government and turn the Mexican Revolution into an anarchist revolution. The contradictions between these two positions created discord within the PLM and some public confusion. Commenting on the matter, one scholar observed that the “Magonists took their public discourse from liberalism, and their strategy from anarchism” (Esperanza Valdez 2000: 182). The PLM attempted to rectify this in 1911 by publishing its “Manifesto,” an explicitly anarchist text that superseded the “Program” as the main statement of the party’s goals. However, the Magonists had lo…
