---
title: "Anarchist Organisation: Why it is Failing"
author: "Graham Purchase"
date: "2011"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/graham-purchase-anarchist-organisation-why-it-is-failing"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 24 June 2011 from www.spunk.org &amp; www.spunk.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "graham-purchase-anarchist-organisation-why-it-is-failing.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/graham-purchase-anarchist-organisation-why-it-is-failing.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Blanket rejection of rational/natural authority and leadership roles        Problem of Egoism/Psychological make up of anarchists        Factionalism        Anarchist Organisation as navel gazing/end in itself        Formalization/Legalization of Anarchist Organisations        Lack of Federation        Conclusion      Communes, Collectives and Claptrap        Communal experimentalism        Collectives and Support/propaganda Groups Anarchist organisations are an insignificant aspect of social history and the present day life of the people. In comparison other non-governmental, community etc., groups are flourishing. The small number of anarchist groups are resource poor (in terms of both people, premises and equipment) and fraught with internal arguements and in dispute with other anarchist organisations. It is useful therefore, to examine from an historical and contemporaneous viewpoint, some of the major reasons for these failings. This is the belief, promotion and practice of silly 1960’s notions of organisation usually based around the ‘open meeting’. A model where any one from any where can participate. Their opinion (and vote) being equal to any other. Such hopeless open church approaches to decision making is not helped much by some sort of basic membership criteria when members as a core theoretical/ideological belief reject natural leadership roles, even those based upon the acquirement of knowledge, expertise and skills gained over years of sustained effort. In actual fact, however, ‘leaderless’ grouplets (because of their small, often friendship based nature) usually become psychologically dominated by one or some of the membership. This is sometimes referred to as the tyranny of structurelessness and occurs because leadership is a feature of all human social activity. Anarchism has to accept (though not unconditionally) it’s Durruti’s (organisational ability/military and tactical skills) and Kropotkin’s (intellectual leadership). It is not leadership that has to be eliminated, but those forms of leadership based upon authoritarian top down command models or those which have a profoundly non-rational or irrational basis. Some common forms of non-authoritarian leadership are: Task-based — We accept the expertise of a competent builder or bootmaker. The ancient Greek philosopher, Plato, reminds us, that a ships passengers/crew in a tempest, will accept the authority of an able captain: “treating him as though he were a God”. Respect for craft/activity/task based expertise or authority is essential to organisational harmony. If people’s expertise is disregarded or they feel that there knowledge is not valued they will become demoralized and leave the group disillusioned. Organisational ability — People also vary in their organisational ability — some people are definitely much better at organising things and people than others. None of this sort of thing necessarily implies authoritarianism. Leadership, can be about skilled facilitation and coordination of the various resources of the group and not just bossing people about. Time — amount of input. Interest — especially when nobody else was willing to take on certain roles/tasks Intellectual leadership — Bakuninism, Proudhonism etc. I include the following quote from Chaz Bufe (who like myself has been around long enough to have a firm grasp of the morass that passes for anarchist organisation), not because I cannot think of what to write, but because it is nice to find someone with whom one can agree. Chaz writes almost exactly what I would have written — and clearly encapsulates what I understand as non-authoritarian leadership. “In the 60’s and 70’s many leftist, anarchist and feminist groups agonised over how to eliminate leadership, equating all leadership (including temporary, task-based leadership) with authoritarian leadership. Their fruitless efforts confirm what the more astute anarchists have been saying for over a century — that it’s a mistake to thi…
