---
title: "Capitalism, Technology and the Environment"
author: "Wage Slave X"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wage-slave-x-capitalism-technology-and-the-environment"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 9 December 2010 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wage-slave-x-capitalism-technology-and-the-environment.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wage-slave-x-capitalism-technology-and-the-environment.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Marxism is often accused of being blind to capitalism’s ravaging of the natural environment. Marxism is most often portrayed, both by its critics and by many of its proponents, as endorsing capitalism’s treatment of, and relationship with nature, and even of supporting its increased extension or intensification. Ever-increasing production and development of the technological means of securing it are widely seen as being ends-in-themselves for Marxism. In fact, this is true of the dominant varieties of Marxism during the 20 th century. However, it is not true of Marx himself, and thus it is possible to forge a critical form of Marxism which rejects that perspective. It is towards the latter goal that I see this text as contributing. While a few Marxologists have undertaken extensive research in order to establish that Marx was in fact far from being blind to capitalism’s fundamental antagonism towards nature (see Paul Burkett, Marx and Nature (1999) and John Bellamy Foster, Marx’s Ecology (2000)), I will here, at the outset, content myself with two short quotes from Marx’s mature writings which clearly illustrate his awareness of this reality. “It is not the unity of living and active humanity with the natural, inorganic conditions of their metabolic exchange with nature, which require explanation or is the result of a historical process, but rather the separation between these inorganic conditions of human existence and this active existence, a separation which is completely posited only in the relation of wage labour and capital.” (Grundrisse, p.489 (Penguin, 1973)) “Capitalist production ... disturbs the metabolic interaction between man and the earth .... [A]ll progress in capitalist agriculture is progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time is a progress towards ruining the more long-lasting sources of that fertility. The more a country proceeds from large-scale industry as the background of its development, as in the case of the United States, the more rapid is this process of destruction. Capitalist production, therefore, only develops the techniques and the degree of combination of the social process of production by simultaneously undermining the original sources of all wealth — the soil and the worker.” (Capital, vol. 1, p. 638 (Penguin edition, 1976) My concern here is not to detail the specific inter-relations between the operation of capital and the natural environment, nor to propose some sort of eco-Marxist strategy for resisting capital’s threats to people and nature. My primary concern, rather, is to focus on the basic approach that a new 21 st century Marxism should take in regard to the question of the general relationship between capitalism and the natural environment, of analyzing its historical trajectory, and, by implication, of the relationship between a post-capitalist society and the environment. This text is conceived as a contribution to larger effort, which is to establish as fundamental to a new, critical Marxism appropriate to the 21 st century that the technology developed by capitalism in its historical transition to its real domination over the whole world possesses an immanent antagonism (tending towards catastrophe) to nature, just as it possesses an immanent antagonism (tending towards catastrophe) to living labour and the workers engaged in it. (In fact, in both cases, it is humanity in general that is ultimately threatened with catastrophe.) The idea is that over the course of the many years of capital’s historical development, of its continual ‘revolutionizing of production’, with modern science at its service, that it has actually built into its technology this antagonistic orientation, which serves to facilitate its maximization of opportunities for domination and exploitation of both living labour and nature. Of course, in capitalist society, especially where the form of domination a…
