---
title: "Against Corporatism"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-against-corporatism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Limits and Pitfalls of Corporatism for South African Trade Unions”"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-against-corporatism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-against-corporatism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ABSTRACT        THE TREND TOWARDS CORPORATISM IN SOUTH AFRICA          Actors supporting corporatism          The establishment of corporatist institutions in South Africa          The prospects for corporatism in South Africa        THE CASE FOR CORPORATISM OUTLINED          Corporatism as the key to reconstruction and development          Corporatism as a lever for social transformation        THE CASE FOR CORPORATISM REJECTED          Corporatism’s material benefits?          Corporatism and workers’ empowerment?        EXPERIENCES WITH CORPORATISM IN SOUTH AFRICA        IN CONCLUSION        REFERENCES This paper reflects upon the experience of corporatism in South African and other contexts. It argues that the prospects for the establishment of corporatist arrangements in South Africa are quite high. However, it also takes issue with a central orthodoxy in discussions of corporatism in South Africa, viz., the notion that corporatism is the key to the empowerment and material upliftment of the broad South African working class. It argues that corporatism is highly unlikely to deliver material gains to the South Africa working-class, and that its achievements on other fronts have hitherto proved minimal and are almost certain to remain so. There is thus little basis for claims that corporatist forums can provide a site for reconstruction and redistribution, let alone a route to social-democracy or socialism. In addition, corporatism imposes a range of costs on the labour movement, including an erosion of trade union democracy, the development of tensions between the leadership and the rank-and-file and the involvement of the unions in the co-management of capitalism. It is suggested that the trade unions should abstain from corporatist arrangements, and instead focus their energies on the consolidation of workplace organisation and rely on struggle as a means of pressing demands- both reformist and transformative. Is corporatism [1] either a viable or a desirable strategy for the South African labour movement? In this paper I reflect on the experience of corporatist arrangements in both South Africa and other countries, and argue in the negative. Although I argue that corporatism is viable in South Africa in the sense that it seems likely to persist, I dispute whether corporatism is a desirable strategy for labour. While it is possible for functioning corporatist structures to develop in South Africa, these will not be in the best interests of either the unions or of the broad working-class, who will receive all of the costs and none of the benefits usually associated with corporatism. It is suggested that an extension of the historic policy of “militant abstentionism” — by which I mean a refusal to identify with, or take responsibility for achieving, the goals of management (Webster 1995)- in the direction of militant independent trade unionism is essential to the development of a powerful union movement capable of fighting for the needs of the whole working-class. Corporatism has been a subject of much discussion, not least in the pages of this journal. Overall, opinion has been favourable, and a variety of arguments have been advanced in support of corporatist arraignments. Support for corporatist arrangements has been forthcoming from the trade unions, from business, from the State, and from the intelligentsia. The unions have played an absolutely pivotal role in the move towards corporatism in South Africa. The Congress of South African Trade Unions’s support for coporatism followed the majority view in the federation (opposed by some affiliates and activists) that unions could use such structures to restructure the capitalist economy in the interests of organised labour, and Black people more generally, by actively intervening in the development of economic and labour policies (see Joffe, Maller and Webster 1993: 2,28–32; von Holdt 1995; Webster 1995). This was associated by COSATU with a vision of a labour-led …
