---
title: "Anarchists and left radicals in Mongolia and Tuva (1910s — 1920s)"
author: "Kirill Limanov, Vadim Damier"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vadim-damier-kirill-limanov-anarchists-and-left-radicals-in-mongolia-and-tuva-1910s-1920s"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Original Publication in Russian at aitrus.info Retrieved on 4th February 2021 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "vadim-damier-kirill-limanov-anarchists-and-left-radicals-in-mongolia-and-tuva-1910s-1920s.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vadim-damier-kirill-limanov-anarchists-and-left-radicals-in-mongolia-and-tuva-1910s-1920s.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Mongolia and Tuva up until 1911 were part of the Qing Empire of China. Already from the middle of the XIX century, the territory of Mongolia served for Russian revolutionaries of all directions, including the Narodniks, and then also the Social Democrats and Anarchists, as a safe haven and a “transit” zone for emigrants to China [1] . Anarchist groups have operated since 1906 in the Russian Transbaikal region [2] . However, any influence of anarchists on the population of Mongolia and Tuva during this period is not traced. The activities of anarchists in the territories of Mongolia and Tuva are connected, first of all, with the events of the Great Russian Revolution of 1917–1921. During the civil war in Russia (1918 — 1922), these two countries turned into a field of confrontation between the armed formations of Russian “red” and “white”, of Chinese and Mongolian military detachments. In socio-economic and political terms, Mongolia and Tuva in the 1910s — 1920s had much in common. The local population engaged mainly in nomadic cattle. Peasant cattle-breeders (arats) were in various forms of dependence on secular nobility and Buddhist clergy (lamas and their datsan monasteries). Industry was not large. In both countries there was also a Russian population, engaged mainly in agriculture, industry and commerce. The political status was determined mainly by the border position between Russia and China. Mongolia, which was part of the Qing Empire until 1911, gained autonomy with Russian support after the fall of monarchy in China. The established regime headed by the leader of the Lamaist church, the Bogd-Khan, who was erected on the Mongol throne, existed until 1919, when the Chinese troops that entered the country liquidated the autonomy. But in the autumn of 1920, Mongolia was captured by the detachments of the Russian “white” General R.F. Ungern-Sternberg, who formally restored the independence of Mongolia. In the summer of 1921, he was defeated by the troops of the Far Eastern Republic and detachments of the Mongolian People’s Party. The new People’s Government established a close alliance with Soviet Russia, and in November 1924 officially proclaimed the Mongolian People’s Republic. Tuva (Uryanghai region), being between Mongolia and Russia, was declared a Russian protectorate in 1914. In 1918, the rule of Soviets was temporarily established in the province, based on Bolsheviks and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. In the summer, it was overthrown by the “whites”. Until the summer of 1919, Tuva was under the control of the Omsk government of Admiral A.V. Kolchak, and then until 1921 on its territory fought with each other “white” and “red” Russian detachments, Chinese and Mongolian troops and local formations. In August 1921, after the final occupation of the Uryanghai by the “reds,” the Tannu-Tuva People’s Republic was proclaimed. The new state existed under the de facto protectorate of Soviet Russia; and Soviet advisers acted in the country. It was in the conditions of civil war in Russia that Russian anarchists began to appear in Mongolia and Tuva, primarily in the “red” detachments. In March 1918 a detachment from Cheremkhovo headed by an anarchist Dmitry Matveyevich Tretyakov arrived in the city of Troitskosavsk (Kyakhta) on the Mongolian border and helped the local Council take power. However, the soldiers refused to obey the authorities and the headquarters of the Red Guard; and conflicts with the population began to erupt. Having arrested a number of “commissars” and policemen who supported Ataman Semyonov, part of the detachment led by Tretyakov went to Irkutsk in April, but was surrounded on the road by the forces of Centrosibir (Supreme organ of Soviet Siberia, — V.D., K.L.) and disarmed. Tretyakov and the commissar of the detachment, Koshkin, were arrested. The remnants of the detachment led by anarchist Graitser remained in Troitskosavsk. On May 21, 1918, the Congress of Soviets of Troitskosavsk Uyezd approved a re…
