---
title: "Anarchist Media in Germany"
author: "Bernd Drücke"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bernd-drucke-anarchist-media-in-germany"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Drücke, Bernd. “Anarchist and Libertarian Media, 1945–2010 (Federal Germany).” Encyclopedia of Social Movement Media, edited by John D. H. Downing, SAGE Reference, 2011, pp. 36–43."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "bernd-drucke-anarchist-media-in-germany.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bernd-drucke-anarchist-media-in-germany.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anarchist and Libertarian Media, 1945–2010 (Federal Germany)          Anarchism’s Renaissance And New Libertarian Media          Linkeck          agit 883          FIZZ          MAD          Graswurzelrevolution (Grassroots Revolution)          direkte aktion          The Anarchist Press in Federal Germany Today          Further Readings        Anarchist and Libertarian Press, 1945–1990 (Eastern Germany)          Umweltblätter/telegraph          Conclusion          Further Readings Right after the end of World War II, the few anarchists who had survived war and fascism started to reorganize the anarchist movement, which had been shattered during the Nazi dictatorship. On May 20, 1945, German anarchism once again raised its journalistic voice, with the journal Mahnruf (Warning Cry), published by Otto Reimers in Hamburg. In 1947, the journal Befreiung (Liberation) was published for the first time in Mühlheim. This newspaper went through several editorial changes and inconsistencies in its content. During its final years in Cologne until its closedown in 1978, it linked old and young anarchists and represented anarcho-syndicalist positions. It had a national circulation of 1,500 copies. Many early postwar anarchist journals were produced on a duplicator. Not so Die Freie Gesellschaft (The Free Society), published by the Föderation Freiheitlicher Sozialisten (Federation of Free Socialists). This “monthly journal for social criticism and free socialism” (subtitle) saw 43 issues between 1949 and 1953. Neoanarchism was mainly influenced by 1960s anticolonialist liberation struggles. The majority of the antiauthoritarian and Außerparlamentarischen Opposition (APO; Extra-Parliamentary Opposition) movement tried to challenge the U.S.-Vietnam War, which was supported by the authorities of the German Federal Republic and the mass media. The APO also opposed the emergency laws of the “grand coalition,” consisting of the Social Democratic Party of Germany and the conservative parties (Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union) and Germany’s mediascape, dominated by the Springer media conglomerate. They contested Germany’s “sclerotic institutions” and their representatives, old-fashioned ideas about morality, and the indifference and complacency of society at large. In June 1967, after the student Benno Ohnesorg was shot dead by a police officer during a Berlin demonstration against the visit of the Iranian despot Shah Reza Pahlavi, many activists within the Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund (Socialist German Student Union) became increasingly radical. Only a year later, anarchist literature gained currency on a hitherto unimaginable scale. At first, classical anarchist writings were published as pirate editions; later on they were produced in high print runs by big publishing houses. Anarchism saw a renaissance. The new anarchist movement consisted mainly of students, pupils, and apprentices. There was no continuity with the old, working-class anarchists, who looked very skeptically at the younger ones from middle-class families. Anarchism researcher Rolf Raasch has argued that there were theoretical divisions between the younger and the older generations. The students initially were committed to a critical version of Marxism. Their attempt at mediation between Marxism and Anarchism, cheerfully unconcerned with past grievances, was inevitably repugnant to seasoned anarchists, who had deeply internalized the historical clashes between both movements—not least because some of them had personally experienced Marxist socialism as practiced in the German Democratic Republic. From February 1968 onward, the neoanarchist movement sharply increased its presence. Neoanarchist, undogmatic, and antiauthoritarian magazines were launched in 1968, particularly in West Berlin. They were models for many subsequent “underground papers.” Their scene jargon and their layout, inspired by Dadaism, differed clearly from the magazines of the o…
