---
title: "The Continuing Appeal of Religion"
author: "Karl Nesic, Gilles Dauvé"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gilles-dauve-karl-nesic-the-continuing-appeal-of-religion"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2016-04-13 from www.prole.info/texts/continuingreligion.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gilles-dauve-karl-nesic-the-continuing-appeal-of-religion.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gilles-dauve-karl-nesic-the-continuing-appeal-of-religion.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        What’s Wrong With Religion?        Why Rationalism Won’t Do        From Religion as a Total Social Act to Religion as a Private Matter        “The Perfect Christian State Is the Atheist State, the Democratic State”        Voltaire Goes New Age        Do It Yourself Religion        Soft and Hard Religion        Religion As Community        (Much of) The East Is Green        The West Is Pale        The United Church        The Priest’s New Clothes        Peace!        Religion as a Critique of Capitalism        When Capitalism No Longer Knows What It Is        Neither Jesus Nor Prometheus        Which Universality? This is a modified version of an essay published in French as the 7 th Lettre de Troploin , June 2006, called Le Présent d’une illusion . The English title is inspired by Fredy Perlman’s The Continuing Appeal of Nationalism , which first came out as an article in The Fifth Estate in 1983 and then as a Black & Red (Detroit, USA) pamphlet the following year. At the risk of passing for narrow minded Marxists, we recommend reading the first part of The German Ideology . On the particular issue of Judaism and Jewish history, a stimulating essay: “The Perplexities of the Middle Eastern Conflict,” was published in The Communicating Vessels , # 16, Spring 2005 (3527 NE 15 th Avenue # 127, Portland, Oregon 97212, USA), and is also available on this site. Not every believer is a social conformist. His independence of mind, his resistance (to war, for example) or rebellion can outdo those of many atheists. Yet religion is tantamount to social acceptation, because its very principle separates a here below from a hereafter which created the here below and is necessarily superior to it. Religious thought (and therefore behaviour) is dualist: it is based on the division between body and soul, matter and spirit, and this divide can only favour the latter over the former. Whatever the believer does to change this world, for him there will always be another world of a higher order. History, life as we daily experience it here and now matter less that what is beyond, outside the everyday world. Therefore, when he fights inequality, exploitation and oppression, the religious person deals with realities that belong to a minor level of reality. He can only (and indeed he must) treat the history of mankind as a subplot within a much larger story that exceeds men and women, because that story relates to and depends upon something outside all men and women of all times. A Christian cannot give the same importance to the history of, say, the Spanish civil war and to the Gospel. He will say the two are “different,” but what ultimately matters to him is the Gospel. The absolute relativizes everything else, or it would stop being absolute. Thus, inequality, exploitation and oppression are attributed to individual, moral, natural deep-rooted causes: whatever change we can achieve has to start within every human heart. Very few Jews, Christians or Muslims take Adam and Eve’s Fall at face value, but such a tale reinforces the belief that “something” draws each of us to evil-doing, dominating and exploiting our fellow creatures, and that mankind’s meandering course is based on a fundamental flaw, which no evolution nor revolution could redress. Historical examples of massacres and horrors only confirm what the original myth symbolizes. Lots of civilizations have imagined a primeval harmony that was lost because of some ill-fated desire or deed, but few went as far as the Bible in putting the blame on the tree of knowledge . It’s because they tried to sort out good from evil that the first couple unleashed the doom that is bound to repeat itself until the end of time. The message is : we should never try to understand what is essential to us, and we must leave the essential to divine or earthly mediators between us and the non-understandable. Consequently, even when religion fuels revolt, as it often does, it’s always with t…
