---
title: "Abolitionism in the 21st Century: From Communization as the End of Sex, to Revolutionary Transfeminism"
author: "Jules Joanne Gleeson"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jules-joanne-gleeson-abolitionism-in-the-21st-century-from-communization-as-the-end-of-sex-to-r"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on February 3rd, 2018 from https://blindfieldjournal.com/2017/08/07/abolitionism-in-the-21st-century-from-communisation-as-the-end-of-sex-to-revolutionary-transfeminism/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jules-joanne-gleeson-abolitionism-in-the-21st-century-from-communization-as-the-end-of-sex-to-r.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jules-joanne-gleeson-abolitionism-in-the-21st-century-from-communization-as-the-end-of-sex-to-r.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Gendered Violence (On the Left and Elsewhere) and Communization in Hindsight        Trans Collectives Calling for Abolition        Abolish prisons, abolish the family, abolish gender?        One Slogan, Many Voices Gender abolition was a contentious point of discussion among the communization current in the early 2010s. The communizers predicted future historical developments for class politics, in the face of collapsing support for the labor movement, social democratic parties, and the established left. Gender abolition was introduced to this discussion by piece in the French Marxist theory journal Theorie Communiste (TC) . [1] Theorie Communiste used stark terms to emphasize the centrality of gender abolition to their envisioned pathway to communism: ‘The revolution as communization is borne by this cycle of struggles, which produces its characteristics; as such, however, it is predicated on the abolition of the gender distinction.’ * For Theorie Communiste abolishing gender is foundational to any movement beyond capitalism, an indispensable feature of this development (which they anticipate as forthcoming in the foreseeable future): There is no abolition of the division of labor, no abolition of exchange and of value, no abolition of work (the non-coincidence of individual activity and social activity), no abolition of the family, no immediacy of relations between individuals which define them in their singularity, without the abolition of men and women. There can be no self-transformation of proletarians into individuals living as singular individuals, without the abolition of sexual identities. [2] Exactly reversing commonplaces that matters of gender could be settled ‘after the (economic) revolution’, Theorie Communiste predicated communization’s success on the abolition of sexual differentiation. Any successful revolutionary process required at first a struggle of women against their position, ensuring a crisis of social reproduction. Theorie Communiste rejects currents within materialist feminism that identify the domestic sphere as its own mode of production (a position defended by Christine Delphy), instead arguing that the capitalist mode of production can only function through the surplus labor drawn from the men/women division. Surplus labor could be appropriated only through the division of labor possible along these lines, with all waged work predicated on the unwaged contribution made by women as domestic laborers. The necessity of domestic labor’s existence, and the continuing denial of its value in order to elevate the worth extracted from labor-power, leaves the role of women ‘bound up’ with capitalism in such a way that revolutionary change can only occur through the overturning of female oppression. Labor-power’s reproduction continues as a consequence of gender demarcation, and to cease this process would require an end to this dyadic gender division. Given the existing division within the working class, a revolutionary situation would immediately expose the role of women, and require them to overcome not only Capital but their male ‘comrades’. [3] Theorie Communiste’s account is helpful in furthering a Marxist account of abolition, through its elaboration of labor power’s foundation in domestic labor. They argue this leaves this form of unwaged work the source of potential exploitation of waged work: Domestic labor does not create value, but it increases the surplus value captured by the capitalist who exchanges the wage for labor-power. The wage pays the value of the commodities entering into the reproduction of labor-power, which neither includes the labor-time necessary for their further elaboration post-purchase (e.g. cooking or assembling IKEA furniture) nor the labor-time necessary for their maintenance to preserve them as use-values. [4] The worker and their labor-power is the creation of the domestic laborer, in a way at once absent in the formal exchange of labor for wage, and indispensab…
