---
title: "Crypsis Theory"
author: "Cody Fielder Meyocks"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/cody-fielder-meyocks-crypsis-theory-an-organic-natural-philosophy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Organic Natural Philosophy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "cody-fielder-meyocks-crypsis-theory-an-organic-natural-philosophy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/cody-fielder-meyocks-crypsis-theory-an-organic-natural-philosophy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        An Organic Cosmology        Geobiology        Crypsis Theory        Linguistics & Etymology        Crypsis And The Origins Of Civilization        Urban Geolithics & Timescales Sustainability        The Problem Of Violence        The Existential Crisis        The Commons I am faced with the imposing task of condensing years of research and critical inquiry into chapbook format because of eminent threats to my life and safety by the monarchist movement, whose mideival sedition of United States democracy from the outer wings of the technology sector and its related convergence apparatus (the borderless merger of the defense, intelligence, justice, and private economic complexes into a concentrated amalgamation) has blindsided history as of my writing this. That American democracy might come under attack from within, and from the corrosion of such seemingly sacrosanct institutions, is at once heartbreaking, and the inevitable logic of American’s previous era of exporting imperial domination to other democracies throughout the world. We should be sobered and reluctantly responsible, if nothing else, for this winding of the arc of history, as it continues to turn upon itself and unfold the future. With that said, I am facing severe and life threatening persecution, and I have good reason to believe that my work in natural philosophy would be at risk of being coopted by the monarchists if I do not endeavor to publish a brief summary of these theories, which are based in the Enlightenment values of secular humanism—for me, a deeply spiritual conviction in the universal sovereignty of the individual human spirit, the democratizing power of collected knowledge and literature, and the endearing virtue of the arts and sciences to discover and relay truths of the human soul and of the universe both as concrete conclusions and as unmitigated expressions of life force and emotion. This is just, then, a strand of collective endeavor that reaches far back into history, which I hope to salvage by putting it to print: a right that I have had to struggle for more than anyone would believe. The subject at hand is the origins of human symbolic cognition, or our unique ability as a species to use abstract signs as stand-ins for something that corresponds in reality (the signified and the significator). This singular adaptation accounts for our use of language, numbers, the alphabet and writing (which itself delineates the boundary between history and prehistory), glyphs and pictographs, and our many forms of art and cultural ingenuity. It also has a broader, less intuitive anthropology as the source of ritual, fetishism, costume, and craft—patterns of human behavior that encompass nearly all modes of cultural expression in the touching plurality and universalism of their many communities throughout history. Beneath all forms of language and religion, I believe there is a substratic language of human heartedness that transcends and endures beyond their precious differentiations. That, and the origins of our species’ unique cultural expressions, is the subject of the present work. <verse>The Self-Organizing Cosmos The Elemental & Void Comparative Cosmogenesis Structure / Formlessness / Pattern The Void as Container An Organic Universe It may seem presumptuous to stretch our discussion of the origins of religion and belief back to the origins of the cosmos as we know it, yet my purpose in doing so should become clear as these theories unfold in the following pages. Foremost is an interest in harmonizing an inquiry into cultural plurality and a diversity of ontologies with the rather strict expectations of the modern sciences—a bridge which I am hoping to build here through their common grounds in epistemology, or what we might call an interest in metaphysics. This is the basis of mythology and religion, and likewise the cultural heritage of the natural sciences and humanities (although some may bristle at the comparison—perha…
