---
title: "Against the (New and Old) Familism"
author: "Humanaesfera"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/humanaesfera-against-the-new-and-old-familism-down-with-the-family"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Down with the Family!"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "humanaesfera-against-the-new-and-old-familism-down-with-the-family.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/humanaesfera-against-the-new-and-old-familism-down-with-the-family.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       THE FAMILISM        "DISCIPLINARY SOCIETY" AND " SOCIETY OF CONTROL"        GENERALIZED FAMILISM: THE DOMESTICATION OF UNIVERSAL EVERYDAY LIFE THROUGH THE INTERNET        SOLUTION: ABOLITION OF THE FAMILY Whoever is DEPRIVED of the means to satisfy his needs is faced with private property. He is coerced, if he does not want to die (socially and physically), to submit to the whims, arbitrariness and volubility of those who have the power to provide for his needs: in the case of the children, the parents. Not coincidentally, the word ´family´ derives from the Latin ´famulus´, "slave, servant". In this word, the Latin radical ´fames´ means "hunger", according to Roman popular etymology [1] . For the ancient Romans, the ´familia´ is primarily constituted by the power to punish (by starving) and reward (by ending the hunger) the slaves / servants (which included the wife, children, and the acquired ´famuli´). Today, many criticize the patriarchal family defending one modern, postmodern, libertarian, matriarchal, queer, polygynic, polyandric, tribal, zoogamic, communal, digital, neo-hippie family and so on. They wish to add to the family a plurality of new adjectives, perpetuating the bondage to which the new generations are subjected for millennia. [2] Since the emergence of capitalism (ie, the industrial capital, the proletariat and the modern state, simultaneously, eighteenth century), the familism is the central fetish by which the proletarians (ie, those deprived of the property of any means of life) accept willingly to engage in maintaining and improving the enterprise and the government, creating and accumulating with dedication the very hostile power that systematically subjugates them, wears out them, recycles them, discards them and abandons them - the capital. This is because they place their libido (cathexis), their desires, in the family, pseudo capitalist property in which they fantasize are accumulating their own capital on a par with the capitalists. This leads them to support the ruling class and the police, that is, the state as guarantor of this fictitious property. Thanks to familism, which is this belief in their pseudo-capitalist property on a set that encompasses children, sexual partners, toothbrushes, car, house, etc., the proletarians imagine themselves as capitalists as the owners of the means of existence and production who exploit it, and imagine themselves to have the same interests as they. It follows from the familism the belief that there are only "middle class" and "bandits": an infinitely subdivided hierarchy, ranging from "successful" families - "high high middle class" - to "failed" families - "low low middle class", - a hierarchy which is supposed to be established "objectively, naturally, legitimately" in the cruel but fair ("meritocratic") competition for survival, competition for what is for few (scarcity - private property imagined as a natural, eternal phenomenon). But the "middle class" as a whole congregates and cheer for the police (which they ascribe a theocratic, superhuman status, completely free to kill and torture) against the "bandits." These latter are any scapegoats that the factions of the proprietary class (grouped as identities, fatherlands, ethnicities, "good citizen", or dressed in other fantasies, such as the symmetrical left and right halves of capital and state) exhibit in the means of communication as the cause of all evil: from "slums dweller" to "Jews", "vagabonds", "foreigners", "outsiders", "terrorists", "imperialists", "communists" etc. Thus, in case of war, each competing bourgeois faction easily recruits proletarians to attack and massacre each other, to attack and massacre their own class brothers behind the frontiers invented by the exploiters, imagining that they are attacking those stereotypes, ideological scarecrows, scapegoats. If in its apex familism is the consecration of the military slaughter, in its base it is the consecration of the daily war of…
