---
title: "Challenge: Stop Being Ableist When Criticising Horrible People"
author: "Nerd Teacher"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nerd-teacher-challenge-stop-being-ableist-when-criticising-horrible-people"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://nerdteacher.com/?p=598"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nerd-teacher-challenge-stop-being-ableist-when-criticising-horrible-people.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nerd-teacher-challenge-stop-being-ableist-when-criticising-horrible-people.epub"
    hosted: false
---

This isn’t the first time that I’ll have written something in defense of something about a conservative trash-fire masquerading as a politician, and it probably won’t be the last because a bunch of liberals and leftists think it’s fun to be ableist (at minimum). Instead of focusing on how absolutely grotesque these people are, how they’re happy to hurt as many people as possible, how they’re fine with letting us all die, they’re happier to mock either their status as a GED holder or having penmanship that they think is “bad.” And it’s the latter that I’m about to address in this piece. --- There has been a tradition among progressives to occasionally champion horrible causes for the sake of “social betterment.” This doesn’t mean that every cause they championed was horrible (or even intended to be harmful, despite the harm it may have caused), but a lot of people across the political spectrum supported eugenicist policies, and this honestly bled into loads of policies from the Progressive Era, with many supporting both exclusionary labour and immigration legislation because the labour force "should be rid of unfit workers." Even after World War II, when many people stopped specifically mentioning eugenics, they still engaged in developing policies that were obviously eugenicist. This ranged from how programs within schools were developed to maintain policies excluding people based on class, race and ethnicity. Across the United States and Europe, people were segregated into schools based on their perceived ability. (Not to mention all the Indigenous kids forced into residential schools, the racist and segregationist policies that separated kids by race, and Roma and Sinti kids who are still pushed into segregated schools.) It seems that there are many self-proclaimed progressives who really need to deal with the history of their movement, as well as the figures they celebrate. Currently, there are disabled children across the globe who are placed into segregated schools for disabled children because many schools are not outfitted with obvious disability-friendly architecture that should be standard by now. Many public schools, unless the community pays for it, do not have elevators for students with mobility or medical issues; many of them do not have ramps that enable physically disabled people to even enter the building, ensuring that all disabled community members stay out. They largely do not have any form of accessible entrances or exits, forcing disabled people to rely entirely on others and leaving them at a distinct disadvantage within the “public” system. Instead of creating spaces that include disabled students and enable them to be autonomous learners, they are required to go to spaces “built for them” so they are out of sight and out of mind for the non-disabled population. Despite how common disability is, these disabled children will remain unseen by their non-disabled peers who will later use their lack of interaction as a way to explain that they “do not understand” or “could not possibly know” about the needs of disabled people when they are inevitably called out for perpetuating harmful practices. It creates an excuse by the non-disabled population to “forget” that we even exist, despite the fact that they often go to lengths to ensure that we cannot be seen. Instead of reckoning with their history of eugenics and exclusion, they continue it “for our benefit.” It’s merely one form of cyclical abuse and neglect, and this is part of what allows liberals and leftists to persist in maintaining ableism as part of their movements despite the claim that they support the liberation of all. Because they “just don’t know any better,” or so the story goes. --- Specifically, the ability to write by hand is often seen as “necessary for learning” and is believed to be a core element of a person’s ability to be literate. According to Gunther Kress’s book Before Writing: Rethinking the Paths to Literacy : “Writing demands a …
