---
title: "Book Review: “We Are Forests: Inhabiting Territories in Struggle”"
author: "Alexander Dunlap"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-dunlap-book-review-we-are-forests-inhabiting-territories-in-struggle"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://undisciplinedenvironments.org/2024/09/25/book-review-we-are-forests-inhabiting-territories-in-struggle-cambridgepolity-2023/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexander-dunlap-book-review-we-are-forests-inhabiting-territories-in-struggle.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-dunlap-book-review-we-are-forests-inhabiting-territories-in-struggle.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Into the Forest: The Strife that is Existence        We are Nature Defending Ourselves Jean-Baptiste Vidalou, “We Are Forests: Inhabiting Territories in Struggle” (Cambridge: Polity, 2023) It’s shameful. The original French publication of We are Forests: Inhabiting Territories in Struggle by Jean-Baptiste Vidalou was in my hands since April 2018. Frequently described as “the French Seeing Like a State,” the book explores the art of state making in France. Having been in stimulating dialogues with Jean-Baptiste Vidalou (JBV) since 2018, and being linguistically challenged, I knew the general ideas and points in the book—but never fully read the book! Now, since September 2023, the book has been published in English. And, as of today, I have finally read the book front-to-back and, for this delay, I apologize JBV. Why apologize? Well, the book—considering my interests and standards—is f#%king amazing. While partially insulted I was not asked to do a testimonial for the English version of the book, I use this to pretend we are even for my abhorrent review delay. Described as “a dry-stone wall builder and philosopher” on the back cover, Vidalou presents us with a book packed with crucial, some might call, “insurrectionary research” and an expose of “anarchist political ecology” into state making in France—even if the author would likely not define themselves this way (or at all). Reading the book provides cathartic joy, combative insights and poetic wit, which deserves acknowledgement and discussion before it completely falls into the void of academic publishing. Written in a pithy, sharp and fluid style, the book has nineteen chapters and takes us from ancient times to 2016, while occasionally taking the reader to other parts of the world outside France. We are Forests weaves together state formation, the central role of technical expertise, counterinsurgency strategies and how they separate people from the forests and our wider communities. “Preservation and exploitation are today the two sides of the same colonization,” explains Vidalou, continuing that “what is known as ‘ territorial management’ must be understood as a low-intensity war ” (p. 7. emphasis added). The book is about social war and colonization, revealing the intimate disciplining, control and warfare waged against forests and people alike to meet the imperatives of state and capital. This book, as the title suggests, is also about inhabiting territories—being intrinsically connected to habitats—and charting how that relationship is destroyed and how resistance revives this relationship. We are Forests , in terms of political ecology jargon, is an expose into “political forests” occupied by France (Peluso & Vandergeest, 2011), documenting the intimate relationship between insurgent resistance and forests. The first half of the book, while interweaving contemporary references to the NoTAV and ZAD struggles, is dedicated to analyzing the Camisard’s war at the turn of the 17 th Century and the process of subjugating and colonizing the mountainous south-central region Cévennes into the present. “The Camisard’s war,” Vidalou reminds us, is a “textbook case studied by experts in counter-insurgency strategy so that “military lessons can be drawn from the mountains of the Cévennes for the efforts in Afghanistan” (p. 14). Revealing the complicity of engineers, planners and infrastructure in military operations, JBV, summarizes: Cartography, from its imperial origins, was conceived as a tool of colonization, a way of writing the story of a conquest in which the civilized takes over territories that are supposedly “empty” but which in fact always have to be “emptied” because they are populated. The others, the remote, exist only to be denigrated, domesticated, erased. Colonization throughout the book, refers to the subjugation of people, breaking them to the whims of an invading centralized authority, its economy and dominating culture, whether in the area demarcated …
