---
title: "Basic Anarcho-Syndicalism"
author: "Confederación Nacional del Trabajo, Jeff Stein"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/local-federation-of-the-cnt-ait-sevilla-spain-basic-anarcho-syndicalism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "(Revolutionary Unionism)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "local-federation-of-the-cnt-ait-sevilla-spain-basic-anarcho-syndicalism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/local-federation-of-the-cnt-ait-sevilla-spain-basic-anarcho-syndicalism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Part One: The Goals and Structure of the CNT          What is Anarcho-Syndicalism?          How is it different from other unions and social movements?          The basic structure of anarcho-syndicalism: the union branch          Functions of the anarcho-syndicalist unions          Human and technical means          Legal advisors to the CNT          What is the union committee?          Commitee members are not paid        Part Two: The CNT in the Workplace          The Union Section          The Union Elections          Daily Activity of the Anarcho-Section          Relations Between the Section & the Union          Workplaces and Sectors Without Enterprise Committees          Relation of Your Union with Other Local Unions of the CNT          How is the Local Committee Chosen?          Means of Relation and Co-ordination Between Local Federations: The Regional Confederation          Relations Between Different Regional Confederations: The National Confederation          Why are Committees Elected this Way?          How Do the Unions of the CNT Make Decisions?        Part Three: The CNT’s Revolutionary Principles          Affiliation          The Principles of Anarcho-Syndicalism          Direct Action: The Tactics of Anarcho-Syndicalism          The Final Goal of Anarcho-Syndicalism          Voting in the Anarcho-Union        Translator’s Comments Anarcho-syndicalism is a current of thought and principles that appeared at the end of the 19 th century. It has these fundamental characteristics: The goal of organising the world’s workers for the defence of their immediate interests, and to obtain improvements in their quality of life. To form unions to achieve this. The creation of a structure in which there are neither leaders nor executive power. The desire for the radical transformation of society, a transformation to be brought about by the means of a Social Revolution. Without this goal of transformation, anarcho-syndicalism does not exist. Another name for anarcho-syndicalism is revolutionary syndicalism. Anarcho-syndicalism has the conviction that the causes of social inequality and injustice, are based on power, on the principle of authority, which puts a minority in charge, disposing of the wealth produced by society and maintaining its privileges by means of violence, and the obedient majority, has no more than what it needs to survive and must suffer the violence of the minority. Consequently, anarcho-syndical- ism, in order to eliminate injustice opposes the principle of authority, decision-mak- ing by the elites, and the ultimate representation of power: the State. Contrary to the hierarchical Organisation and authority of the State-Capital, and its repressive apparatus, anarcho-syndicalism poses its Anti-Organisation. This involves a process, in which decisions are made at the base, in which the people participate, in which there is no leadership (or it is very limited), there is no repression, and there exists full liberty and equality in the exchange of ideas, opinions, and initiatives. Anarcho-syndicalist organisation resembles that of the State-Capital as little as possible. It is thus an anti-organisation when compared to the authoritarian model existing nowadays. The CNT is a union, a confederation of industrial union branches. A union branch is a group of people who work in the same branch of production, to defend their interests. The unions of the CNT are industrial unions, contrary to what are called trade unions. Trade unions, for example, divide health workers into the nurses’ union, the medical technicians’ union, doctors’ union, etc. In contrast the CNT health workers form the Union of Public Health, without distinction to professional categories. This structure was adopted at the Sans Congress in 1918. It was agreed on because it was seen as the most practical in struggles with capital. Everything in the CNT revolves around the union. An industrial union in health, for example, is formed by t…
