---
title: "65 Years of Revolution: The Anarchist Federation of Uruguay"
author: "Oliver Zuzenko"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/oliver-zuzenko-65-years-of-revolution-the-anarchist-federation-of-uruguay"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://acmeanjin.org/articles/65-years-of-revolution/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "oliver-zuzenko-65-years-of-revolution-the-anarchist-federation-of-uruguay.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/oliver-zuzenko-65-years-of-revolution-the-anarchist-federation-of-uruguay.epub"
    hosted: false
---

From the 27 th to the 29 th of October the Federación Anarquista uruguaya – FAU celebrated its 65 th anniversary of its founding. The FAU developed the theory of Especifismo, a strategy for anarchist communist organising that strongly influences Anarchist Communists Meanjin. During its existence it has played a significant role in union organising, international political discourse and resistance to dictatorship. To introduce this organisation, its history and ideas to an Australian audience I have written this article. The Río de la Plata region, which includes parts of Uruguay, Argentina, Brazil and Bolivia, came into contact with anarchism through European migrants. Errico Malatesta, the famous Italian anarchist, spent four years there and had an enduring influence on the region. Uruguay was among the few countries that retained anarchism as a mainstream ideology in the labour movement after the Bolshevik party gained control of the Russian Revolution. After the defeat of the CNT-FAI in the 30’s, however, membership of anarcho-syndicalist unions began to dwindle. Coming out of World War Two, Uruguay had a prosperous economy that warranted it the name “the Switzerland of Latin America”. This was due to its export of agricultural products to the Allies in World War Two and the Americans in the Korean War. With the end of the Korean War and no large standing armies to feed, the global agricultural industry took a downturn. The golden age of Uruguay came to an end during the mid-50’s. This was accompanied with a rise in labour and social unrest. It was in these conditions of economic depression and an anarchist presence in the labour movement that the FAU was created. The FAU was founded in Montevideo in 1956 with a broad array of people and groups. It included students, unionists, intellectuals, community organisers and a section of Spanish exiles who fought in the civil war. They went to work in adapting the theories of Bakunin, Malatesta, and anarcho-syndicalism, among others, to their changing local circumstances. The same year, 150,000 marched off the job in solidarity with striking workers of the FUNSA tire factory. Throughout the strike and afterwards the FAU worked with unions to create a less sectarian movement. Unlike Australia, the union movement in Uruguay was organised around political lines. You had union groupings of anarchists, communists, moderate socialists, christian democrats, scab unions and right-populists. The FAU saw this as dividing the working class. They thought that by being in a broader mass organisation the working class was more powerful and less susceptible to organised scabbing. In this way they stepped away from orthodox anarcho-syndicalism which advocated for separate ideological unions. This would culminate in the founding of the National Convention of Workers (CNT) in 1964. From its inception the FAU was active in the labour movement and pushing for a more united working class. The first controversy arose over a divide in 1959 around support for the communist revolution in Cuba. One side made up primarily of fine arts students and medical professionals decried the revolution. The other side had a position of critical support for the Cuban’s. A split occurred in 1963 as the anti- Fidelista groups left citing Cuba’s drift towards the Soviet bloc as an unforgivable crime. The group that stayed was critical of Castro and his government but championed the popular movement that overthrew the Batista dictatorship. They also had a positive outlook on the effect that the Cuban revolution had on the non-anarchist left. Communists across Latin America were beginning to see a path to socialism other than the electoral one universally espoused by Moscow-aligned communist parties at that time. After the split the FAU strove to have a more unified idea of what it meant to be an anarchist and how the organisation was to act. Another effect that the Cuban revolution had on Latin America was a change in the U…
