---
title: "Emancipatory mutual aid"
author: "PReP / Neighborhoods"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/prep-neighborhoods-emancipatory-mutual-aid-from-education-to-liberation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From education to liberation"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "prep-neighborhoods-emancipatory-mutual-aid-from-education-to-liberation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/prep-neighborhoods-emancipatory-mutual-aid-from-education-to-liberation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What is mutual aid?        Practicing liberation        Mutual aid during COVID-19        PReP / Neighborhoods The COVID-19 pandemic has strained and even overwhelmed the public health, medical care and disaster response systems where governments and state agencies were ill-prepared to contain and suppress infectious outbreaks. In countries where emergency lockdown measures have been adopted without accompanying policies to guarantee income security and housing tenure, there is the additional problem of economic hardship. Already existing and newly formed non-governmental organizations and associations have mobilized to fill the gap. These formal and informal groups assist people forced into the margins by government neglect with free meals, grocery and medicine deliveries, safe housing and even cash. They are going beyond traditional voluntary charity disaster relief to provide personal protective equipment (notably face masks⁠), COVID-19 symptoms monitoring, accurate information about locally available COVID-19 and antibody testing facilities, emotional counseling and more. In some cases, these organizations partner with public agencies, including in situations where state institutions are both omnipresent and capable and voluntary associations are essentially licensed subcontractors of the state ⁠— as appears to be the case, but only in part, in the People’s Republic of China . In other contexts — particularly where robust social safety nets are lacking or where austerity has undermined any expectation of government assistance — people have done what they have always done in a crisis: attempted to stem the tide of misery with the resources they have. Some of these organizations or associations of individuals are describing their efforts to help those in trouble as “ mutual aid organizations .” These groups reflect the social or political philosophies of their founders and members, from a devotion to principles of community self-help ⁠— in both its conservative and radical variants ⁠— to a belief that systematically oppressed groups best overcome their oppression through collective self-management and self-provisioning. They distinguish themselves from charity organizations by their lack of formal association with either the government or the non-profit or religious charity sector and identify as just people helping other people in need . In New Orleans, for example, a mutual aid group mobilized by Jasmine Araujo called Southern Solidarity has emerged guided by Black feminist liberatory thought and inspired by the direct relief and organizing practices of the Black Panthers. The group of 30 organize the daily delivery of food, medical resources and other basic needs directly to 300 unhoused people in the downtown area of New Orleans because the government failed to meet these needs . Southern Solidarity is involved in both direct relief and consciousness raising efforts of members and recipients. Members act on the principle that when those who are oppressed receive needs, they are better equipped to move from survival mode to organizing. Key members include trans activists, organizers, formerly incarcerated and the unhoused. Mutual aid as a political concept is drawn from the work of anarchist and scientist Peter Kropotkin. In 1902, Kropotkin published Mutual Aid: A Factor in Evolution which argued that it was human cooperation and not competition which has facilitated the survival of our species. Additionally, Kropotkin proposed that the best system of economic and social organization would be one based on mutual exchanges rather than coercion and the profit-motive. Mutual aid societies or “benevolent societies” have long arisen among disenfranchised groups to fill gaps in insurance, support, education and relief. Examples include the Free African Society formed in late 18 th century Philadelphia by formerly enslaved men and contemporary organizations of refugees and immigrants such as the Cambodian Mutual Assistanc…
