---
title: "Getting Organized"
author: "Lake Effect Collective"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lake-effect-collective-getting-organized"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 4-Feb-2026 from https://lakeeffect.noblogs.org/post/2025/07/03/getting-organized/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lake-effect-collective-getting-organized.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lake-effect-collective-getting-organized.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Why exist?        What is our group life like?        Why aim for transparency?        Should political life make us miserable? Our group is a conscious experiment at bridging our earlier affinity-based organizing with a named, semi-structured organization. This has attracted questions from both intentionally-opaque affinity groups and people more at home in the world of public-facing activism. We’ve collectively authored this piece to clarify how we work together and why. And of course, we aren’t the only ones experimenting with more formal organization. Plenty of crews are doing cool, committed work where they live. Having been a conscious group for only about a year, we are still experimenting with our practices of working, reading, analyzing, and discussing together. We believe these are processes that cannot be perfected in advance, but rather must be constantly tested and reworked as demanded by practice. And as the political and economic landscape shifts and our group matures, there will likely be further changes to our internal organization. The principles we’ve laid out below help orient us in this process, but so does discussion with and inspiration from other groups across the spectrum of formality. From the practical aspects of tool and skill-sharing, to methods of assessing ongoing projects and different modes of studying and writing together, we hope to learn from others what has worked for them, and what hasn’t. In addition to clarifying who we are and how we work together, we’re hopeful that this document contributes to those discussions. The Lake Effect Collective emerged as a means to navigate between two bad choices. The first was remaining at the level of overlapping affinity groups, which make up the base layer of radical, politicized people. The affinity group is useful for moving together, especially for direct actions and higher-stakes street situations. However, since it relies on relations of affinity between individuals, it constantly risks breakdown via interpersonal conflict, limits our continuity between artificially-separated social movement campaigns, and rarely allows the development of strategic thinking or larger-scale activity. The second option was folding ourselves into the upper layer of the movement: large, recruitment-oriented organizations, which may facilitate larger-scale action but tend to prioritize those organizations’ self-perpetuation and expansion over their stated loyalties to collective emancipation. (As a result, we found their strategic lines unclear and unhelpful, as successes and failures in “intermediate struggles” pile up and the revolutionary goal appears no closer.) As we have moved into a place somewhere between these two poles, we have sought to avoid excessive informality and the tyranny of structurelessness, while orienting to and prioritizing the autonomous character of mass struggle. Some of our members have spent time as part of named, formal organizations that aimed to address some of the same problems we do. But they found these formal organizations, which were defined by shared doctrines and commitments to ideas and internal processes, often ended up treading water without defining concrete tasks beyond their own perpetuation, spiraling into conflict over their abstract points of contention, or breaking apart once realizing their unity rested merely on such abstract points. By contrast, our group emerged out of a few interlocked affinity groups with working relationships. We have privileged a working political unity achieved in practice over ideological “political” unity, which all too often leaves participants unsure where to start acting; this is a common feature of student and activist movements, where hyper-specific ideological affiliation and aimless activity for its own sake are two sides of the same coin. Practical activities have shaped how we reflect on things we’ve done, propose future projects, consider long-term strategies, and conduct act…
