---
title: "7 Reasons to Hate Election Season"
author: "Tanze Vatt"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tanze-vatt-7-reasons-to-hate-election-season"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This is a piece from the first issue of Haters Magazine, tho the author would write the piece differently if written now, they have decided to leave it unedited since some people have found it useful. You can find a zine version of the essay here. haters.noblogs.org/post/2022/06/10/7-reasons-to-hate"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tanze-vatt-7-reasons-to-hate-election-season.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tanze-vatt-7-reasons-to-hate-election-season.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1 / IT’S ALL JUST A GAME        2 / REPRESENTATION IS REPRESSION        3 /CITIZENSHIP IS AN INSULT        4/ PROGRESS IS A MYTH        5 / VOTING IS NOT DIRECT ACTION        6 / VOTING IS NOT HARM REDUCTION        7 / WE CAN DO BETTER, AND MORE        Further Reading It’s 2020, and it’s that time again. Election season—and hate is in the air. Finally, many leftists in favor of voting are beginning to slide away from this bias, hopefully ready to lay down the last vestiges of liberalism, or even move past the left. What’s more likely, however, is that a shiny new candidate—a Bernie 2—will come along and, provided elections continue, they’ll fall back into their old campaign-obsessed ways. This isn’t addressed to them alone. The following essay is also for those who ask, “Why wouldn’t you vote?”; who say it’s harmless; who say it’s a “strategy.” Voting: it’s the reason for the season (election season). And we hate every second of it. It’s unclear whether the political game erodes empathy or shows how little there was to begin with. Maybe both. Either way, election season is a great time to find out who has their head all the way up their own ass—it’s interesting that electoralists will use often throw accusations of moral superiority complexes at those who don’t vote, and then go on to be ethically bankrupt while acting as the actual holier-than-thou party. With the USPS in danger of being dismantled, many people worry that their medications, including time-sensitive meds, rely on the USPS. Many people who live in rural areas, including reservations, are at risk of not getting mail service at all. But the electoralists don’t think of the people—they think of the game. So it immediately became a question of voting—​ who cares if you can’t get your insulin? What matters more is that you won’t be able to vote.​ It’s all about the Republicans attacking voter rights so that not as many people can vote Democrat in November. Here’s an excerpt from an article in the ​ Rapid City Journal​ , out of Rapid City, South Dakota, that details some impacts that closing USPS offices in rural communities, particularly those on reservations, has: Reservation residents depend upon their local post offices to keep their mailed medicines and Social Security, veterans’ benefit and other checks safe. They do their business at the post office, buying money orders to pay their monthly expenses. Customers of the Allen, Manderson and Wounded Knee post offices frequently walk long distances or wait days to use precious gas to collect their mail. Now, those same people are staggered by the news that the U.S. Postal Service has placed the three post offices on a list of almost 3,700 post offices under review for possible closings. Eighty small post offices across South Dakota are on the list, including 11 on or near reservations. This may sound like a coordinated attack on the part of the Trump administration to restrict voting access. Except the article, entitled Post Offices Vital to Reservation Communitie s, was published in 2011, during Obama’s first term in office, and is one of hundreds of similar articles from its time. The Obama Administration also made attempts to gut the postal service, so it’s a little bit bizarre for liberals to use this as a reason to vote blue. More than that, it comes across as callous towards those impacted by post office closings and mail box removals in both 2011 and 2020. It’s too bad that your life or livelihood might suffer—what’s worse is that my ​team might lose. This type of thinking can be seen elsewhere. What was once considered “extreme” weather is now the norm. In August, a massive derecho—a large line of storms—swept through Iowa, causing widespread destruction that included flooding, power outages, and crop damage. In the following week, too many liberals took to social media to lament how this would impact Iowa voters’ ability to go to the polls. Something similar happened as the west coast burned, as if …
