---
title: "Anarchist Speculations"
author: "John Moore, Aragorn!"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-moore-anarchist-speculations"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Writings by John Moore"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-moore-anarchist-speculations.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-moore-anarchist-speculations.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction        Primitivism        Postmodernism        Spirituality        Conclusion      Anarchism and Poststructuralism      Maximalist Anarchism / Anarchist Maximalism      A Primitivist Primer        What is anarcho-primitivism?        How does anarcho-primitivism differ from anarchism, or other radical ideologies?        Where, according to anarcho-primitivism, does power originate?        How does anarcho-primitivism view technology?        What about population?        How might an anarcho-primitivist future be brought about?        How can I find out more about anarcho-primitivism?        How do I get involved in anarcho-primitivism?      Comin’ Home: Defining Anarcho-Primitivism      The Insubordination of Words: Poetry, Insurgency, and the Situationists        I. ART        2. POETRY      Lived Poetry: Stirner, Anarchy, Subjectivity, and the Art of Living        Introduction        Hakim Bey, Language, and Ontological Anarchy        Ontological Anarchy, Modernity and Postmodernity        Stirner and the Anarcho-Psychological Episteme        Stirner, Language, and Subjectivity        Stirner and Poetic Language        Conclusion      Beyond the Fragments: A Reaction to Industrial Society and Its Future        Introduction: Bomb Culture        Ideology and Strategy        The Drums and the Spears      Anarchy and Ecstasy: Visions of Halcyon Days        Chapter 1: A Sprig of Mistletoe        Chapter 2: Toward a Cultural Ecology of Anarchy        Chapter 3: On Ecdysis        Chapter 4: Bewilderness        Chapter 5: Eversion Mysteries        Chapter 6: Culture and Anarchy        Chapter 7: The Appeal of Anarchy        Selected Bibliography      Lovebite Mythography and the Semiotics of Culture        Bibliography      Book of Levelling      Poems        Chaos and Revolution        A Revolution of the Whole Body        The Reinvention of Planets        Unruly Harmony        The Ape’s Paternoster      Appendices        Introduction to Fredy Perlman’s “The Machine Against The Garden: Two essays on American literature and culture”        Selected Writings by Abiezer Coppe        Prophets of the New World: Noam Chomsky, Murray Bookchin, and Fredy Perlman        Anarchy & Ecstasy reviewed by Hakim Bey        Interview with John Moore by John Filiss        In Memorium by John Connor        Obituary by Steve Booth It is uncomfortable to write an appreciation of someone you have never met. Especially, as is the case here, when our shared characteristics include a preference for face-to-face contact, for critiques that are stylistic rather than just textual, and for a kind of gezellig (cozy) familiarity. If l had my way, John Moore would be considered in the company of the most important second wave anarchist thinkers so far, alongside John Zerzan, Bob Black, and Hakim Bey. He originated the term (an obvious homage to feminism’s waves), which I have borrowed as a better descriptor than post-situationist, post-leftist, or other similar jabberwocky. Moore was an anarchist who believed in the anarchist milieu, who wrote for an anarchist audience, and who attempted to use shortcut terminology to encompass wide swaths of conceptual territory. We share all of these traits, for reasons I will be getting into, and this anthology serves as my offering to his memory (He passed in 2002 — while he was about the age I am now — from a heart attack while racing for a bus). While he did not write a magna opus like Fredy Perlman’s Against History, Against Leviathan or Letters of Insurgents, nor continue to write into his dotage (since he didn’t have one), Moore followed, perhaps, the more anarchist path. He produced a few writings about a wide range of topics. He tried not to get stuck to a particular thing (like an ideology). He stayed playful throughout the process. He didn’t make enemies due to his cruelty. Which is not to say that he was not controversial. One of the more surprising things about Moore’s obituary [1] was the liberal …
