---
title: "Diary of operation “Angela Davis”"
author: "Tasos Theofilou"
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tasos-theofilou-diary-of-operation-angela-davis"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on March 26, 2013 from actforfree.nostate.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tasos-theofilou-diary-of-operation-angela-davis.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tasos-theofilou-diary-of-operation-angela-davis.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Tasos Theofilou was arrested in Athens accused of robbing a bank in Paros Island August 18 th , 2012, where a man was killed while trying to stop the robbers. He states that he is an anarchist. He has denied having anything to do with the robbery and the murder at Paros. He claims he wasnt even on the island that day. He is also accused of being part of the organization “Conspiracy Cells of Fire” and of carrying ot terrorist actions. ALL CHARGES ARE BASED SOLELY ON THE DNA EVIDENCE. Dna does not give 100% safe results as it has been pointed out by scientists. His lawyer, Spiros Fitrakis, had stated since Wednesday that his client denies all charges, and also disputes the way they take the dna, through which he was identified as the perpetrator in the Paros case. It should be noted that the cooperate snitches media have already shown photos of him since the first day and have condemned him before there is even a trial. We would like to express our solidarity to anarchist comrade Tasos Theofilou. ACTFORFREEDOMNOW/BOUBOURAS August 18 th , 2012 I come out of Keramikos station (athens). I look for an internet café, which is find closed. My detox from my avatar will last just a little longer. I make my way towards Thissio. Two motorbikes stop in front of me. A herd of people fall on me and immobilize me. I don’t know what is going on. I scream. They cuff me and put a black hood over my head. They do not identify themselves to me. they put me in a car, a Toyota yaris or something. It does not matter. They tell me “You messed up our summer you wanker! We have to deal with you now?”. So, I think. This is the punch line of the antiterrorist force. “Hey, we got him” notifies the driver on his mobile. “You sure its him?” wonders the one who is holding me in the back. “What is your name?” they ask me. I tell them, they are relieved. I have heard stories with a beginning like this about a dozen times. I couldn’t imagine such a continue. Not even in my narrations. I am in an underground garage. At the entrance. I am still wearing the hood and my hands are cuffed behind my back. We wait for the elevator. To “13”, orders someone as soon as we get in. I think of my damn luck and their semiology. What I can see through the hood is the shoes of an endless line of cops in civilian clothes and the floor. They lead me to room. I recognize it. It is the known room in which from time to time various anarchist comrades have posed for the needs of the filming of the now famous force, the antiterrorist. I sit on a chair with my hands cuffed behind my back. “Have you done anything illegal?” asks one. ‘You have arrested me, you waiting for o tell you?’ I thought. I do not answer. “Have you done anything that makes you feel guilty?” he continues. Again I do not answer. I do not understand what they are cooking up. Someone grabs my head from behind. He opens my mouth and puts in a que-tip. I protest. Not that there is any point. I know very well that the antiterrorist is above laws. I know it pumps whatever prestige and uncontrollable authority, not from the authorities of penal justice but from the rules of journalistic barbarity. After a while and after taking my finger prints, without answering my incisive question of whether or not I’ve been arrested, enter the office a new couple of cops. “Did you kill him?” they ask me. I think: this trick they must have learnt from CSI. They threaten you that they will charge you with homicide in order for you, in your panic, to admit anything else. I do not answer. Yes or No. not only I do not know what they are cooking but mainly, I do not even know how they are cooking it. They take the hood off and photograph me. They put it back on and stand me up with my hands cuffed behind my back staring at the wall. Behind me some make stupid sounds. They pretend to be the air or an airplane. They whisper to me: “We will fuck you up baldy!” The hours pass. I count the seconds in my head in order not to lose the feeling of tim…
