---
title: "Fragments of an Anarcha-Transfeminist Sociology of Sex Work"
author: "Vee Cosgrove"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vee-cosgrove-fragments-of-an-anarcha-transfeminist-sociology-of-sex-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Senior Project Submitted to The Division of Social Studies of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "vee-cosgrove-fragments-of-an-anarcha-transfeminist-sociology-of-sex-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vee-cosgrove-fragments-of-an-anarcha-transfeminist-sociology-of-sex-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Acknowledgements      A Last Minute Note On Language      Introduction      Methods and Notes on Positionality      Literature Review and Theory      Structural Pressures and How People Get Into Sex Work      How Does Sex Work “Work”?      Conflicts and Dangers      “Sex Work Is Work” and Anarchist Principles      Overcoming Public Silence and Private Terror in Trans Sexuality      Conclusion      Works Cited Thank you everyone for your contributions to this project and to my growth and development as a human being. Before you read my rantings and ravings about sex and transness, I have some specific people to thank/blame. To my parents, thank you for your continued support of my increasingly outlandish academic endeavors. Also, I am so sorry for everything you’re going to learn about me by the end of this. Have fun! To Allison, thank you. This one is kind of hard because how do I adequately describe the nature of our mentor/mentee relationship? I feel like half of my works cited section is just stuff that’s in your office and articles you’ve assigned in class. Words do not capture how intellectually indebted I am to you and your guidance throughout this whole process. Also thanks for listening to me talk about memes. To Andrew, thank you for instilling such a love of social analysis and talking about sad things that I switched from political science to sociology. Not only would I not be a sociologist without you, I specifically would not be here at Bard College without you. Thank you for teaching me about the sociological imagination, and thank you for telling me about Blithewood. To David, thank you for giving me the gift of love for the written word. I may still be a bit of a Captain Ahab, but I hope you can be proud of where my obsessions and passions have led me. To my friends, thank you for sitting with me for hours on end and listening to me ramble about anarchism and BDSM. We may not have been able to recreate the Golden Ginger drink from Starbucks using only paper cups, ice, the Kline dining hall provided spice rack, and mostly-separated non dairy milks, but I have cherished every moment here with you. From bursting through dorm room doors at 4 am the day before Thanksgiving to sitting in my car with me desperately trying to keep the battery from dying mid-blizzard, you have made my life so full of meaning and love that I run the risk of devolving into overly sentimental babbling about our time together. To the women I interviewed, thank you for sharing your stories with me. In the months I have spent listening to you speak of such rich and lived lives full of heartache and joy, I found the strength to imagine a better world. This work would not exist without you. I owe you the world. To trans women everywhere, thank you for accepting me as one of your own. I found in you a reason to fight. I hope that one day we will all be able to live and love freely without shame. There is power in you. Go fuck some shit up. In my haste, it would appear that I forgot to include an explanation of why this text is written the way it is and some of the potential complications with it, so here it is. In this text, you will find a fair amount of obscene words, transphobic slurs, and trans community specific colloquialisms. This is deliberate and not done without care. All of my interviewees, plus countless other trans people in my life, have asked to read this when it is done, and it occured to me that I do not know how to write about transness and trans-related subjects without my writing having a distinctly trans character. It also occured to me that I do not know how to write about transness and trans-related subjects without in some way referencing my own existence as a non-binary trans lesbian. I mean come on, part of my whole idea with this project was that I’d get to meet other trans women and talk about being trans women. It stands to reason that this had an influence on the literary character of this piece alongside the e…
