---
title: "Exploring the Intersection of Anarchism and Buddhist Ontology"
author: "Gayr Neşriyatı"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gayr-nesriyati-exploring-the-intersection-of-anarchism-and-buddhist-ontology"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 10th March 2023 from gayrnesriyat.substack.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gayr-nesriyati-exploring-the-intersection-of-anarchism-and-buddhist-ontology.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gayr-nesriyati-exploring-the-intersection-of-anarchism-and-buddhist-ontology.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Anarchism, and the notion of the State        Buddhist Ontology          Four Noble Truths          Dependent Origination          The Three Universal Truths        The Role of the Self in Both Philosophies          Anarchist practices in relation to Buddhist Ontolog          Thich Nhat Hanh          The Sangha This essay aims to investigate the potential for mutual enrichment between anarchist political philosophy and Buddhist ontology. Anarchism advocates for the elimination of hierarchical power structures and prioritizes individual liberty, whereas Buddhist ontology aims to comprehend the nature of reality and the self. By exploring the intersections between these two philosophies, one might identify how they may come to complement each other in one sense and lead to a more nuanced understanding of the human experience, and the way humans come together to form decision-making structures. The divergent manifestations of anarchism and its teachings across various regions of the world signify its adaptability to distinct cultural and historical contexts. This article does not assert that Buddhism and anarchism are inherently intertwined due to their perceived similarities. Rather, it highlights the capacity of anarchism as a mechanism for autonomous decision-making within communities of diverse backgrounds, which is integrated with their respective cultural and historical narratives. Furthermore, the approach of Buddhism towards the reality of the world may exhibit compatibility with the principles of anarchism, which resist certain aspects of societal norms. Anarchist theorists often posit that the concept of the state is an abstract construction that lacks a solid foundation in reality. According to this view, the state has historically served as a tool for exerting control and suppressing individuals and communities. In opposition to the conventional belief that the state is indispensable for preserving stability and safeguarding society, anarchists contest that it is the primary cause of violence and subjugation. The state originates from the actions of individuals who aspire to exercise power over others. This power dynamic is sustained by the prevalent notion that the state is crucial to ensuring the smooth functioning of society. Anarchists, however, disavow this perspective and advocate for self-governance, promoting the idea that individuals should have the autonomy to organize their affairs without the imposition of state intervention. One must contest the notion of the state possessing any innate metaphysical essence. Rather, contend that the state is a man-made construct lacking ontological substance beyond the socially and culturally generated constructs that uphold it. Anarchists espouse the position that the state is a byproduct of human volition and possesses no objective existence independent of the cognitive faculties of individuals who subscribe to its existence. Hence, I disavow any ascription of metaphysical potency or dominion to the state, positing that the state's power is entirely contingent upon the acquiescence of its constituents, who reserve the prerogative to rescind their consent at their discretion. Thus, the notion of the state wielding any inherent metaphysical authority to enforce edicts or regulate conduct, and instead advocate for the liberty of individuals to govern themselves autonomously in consonance with their own personal convictions and standards. Therefore, one must contest the concept of the state possessing any inherent metaphysical puissance or supremacy. Rather, must contend that the state's power emanates solely from the concurrence of the governed, who retain the privilege to rescind their agreement at any juncture. Anarchists repudiate the notion of the state possessing any intrinsic metaphysical authorization to promulgate laws or regulate behavior, and instead espouse the principle of individual self-determination, wherein people are free to gove…
