---
title: "The Anarcho-Primitivist FAQ"
author: "Stiller"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/stiller-anarcho-primitivist-faq"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This work was written by Stiller and edited by Nkosi who made this project possible."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "stiller-anarcho-primitivist-faq.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/stiller-anarcho-primitivist-faq.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Glossary        What is anarchism?        What is primitivism?        What do Anarcho-Primitivists want exactly?        Do they have a method or strategy of getting the desired outcome?        Isn’t primitivism utopian?        Will people be properly fed without agriculture?        Will people die of preventable diseases and lack of adequate healthcare?        Do Anarcho-Primitivists reject technology that is already available?        Aren’t Anarcho-Primitivists hypocrites for using technology?        How would disabled people function in a more “primitive” society?        What would prevent people from creating civilization again?        What would prevent a stronger group from taking over a weaker group?        Aren’t people happier in civilization?        Wasn’t civilization made for good reason?        Where can I read more about Anarcho-Primitivist thought? This is an introduction and exploration of the Anarcho-Primitivist worldview encompassing topics ranging from the beginnings of civilization, technology, its impacts and how a primitivist future might look. We felt as if technology and civilization are taken as an assumed good where more technology is viewed as something positive with very few if any drawbacks. However, having been exposed to Anarcho-Primitivist arguments and literature, learning about how power dynamics and social relationships are imbedded and furthered throughout civilization. We view it with outmost importance to further anti-civilization thought through this short introduction which will hopefully awaken the readers interest to this unique perspective in anarchist thought. Below you will find a short glossary defining important words and concepts used in the FAQ. Civilization — the logic, institutions, and physical apparatus of domestication, control, and domination. Domestication — the will to dominate animals and plants Alienation — the feeling that you have no connection with the people around you or that you are not part of a group: Paleolithic — the early phase of the Stone Age, lasting about 2.5 million years, when primitive stone implements were used. Hunter-gatherer — a member of a society that lives by hunting and collecting wild food, rather than by farming Anthropology — the study of human societies and cultures and their development. Rewilding — the large-scale restoration of ecosystems Deindustrialization — The process of removing or reducing industrial capacity or activity in a country or region. Mutual aid — a voluntary reciprocal exchange of resources and services for reciprocal benefit. Gift economy — a mode of exchange where valuables are given without an explicit agreement for immediate or future rewards. While there are many different definitions, the two most common ones seem to be: Belief in the abolition of all government and the organization of society on a voluntary, cooperative basis without recourse to force or compulsion; or Anarchism is a political philosophy and movement that rejects all involuntary, coercive forms of hierarchy. Both definitions are appropriate and an Anarcho-Primitivist can settle for either-or as all uncivilized societies such as the hunter-gatherers did not have a government or involuntary hierarchies which told them how and in what way to live. Unlike other forms of anarchism, which have no problems with civilization and domestication as a concept, Anarcho-Primitivism serves as the only true anti-systemic current. Opposing all institutions, machines, abstractions and the artificial, because they embody power relations. Primitivism can be used to describe two distinct things. Primitivism can refer to a mode of aesthetic idealization of a “primitive” past, which means any landscape or frame which is viewed as being natural or uncivilized. This type of primitivism relates to the visual arts. Primitivism or Anarcho-Primitivism is a social movement critiquing the origins and supposed progress of civilization. This varies as not all Anarcho-Primi…
