---
title: "Anarchism, a History of Anti-Racism"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-anarchism-a-history-of-anti-racism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From the “Anarchy is Order” CD"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-anarchism-a-history-of-anti-racism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-anarchism-a-history-of-anti-racism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anarchists in the International Labor Movement        Anarchists in the Wars Against Fascism        Anarchists in the Struggle Against Imperialism and Neo-Liberalism “What do we mean by respect for humanity? We mean the recognition of human right and human dignity in every man, of whatever race [or] color” — Michael Bakunin, 1867 Anarchist are Free Socialists so we believe that social equality and opportunity for all people should replace property, wealth and privilege as the key value of society. We also believe that so long as governments exist, they are a means to create and preserve inequality. Anarchists believe that social equality cannot be achieved without Free Association, Mutual Aid and Voluntary Cooperation. Anarchists hold that until all are free then no one is free. We believe that it is human nature to be aware of the suffering of others and that our own freedom is dependent on our willingness to fight for the freedom of others. As such its hardly surprising that Anarchists oppose racism and were frequently to be found at the heart of anti-racist struggles. Michael Bakunin (Three Lectures to Swiss Members of the International, 1871) attacked the State as ‘the patrimony of some privileged class” and patriotism as “the solidaristic interest of this privileged class.” Furthermore, “patriotism is a bad, narrow, and disastrous habit, for it is the negation of human equality and solidarity.” He stated that “no war between races, nations, States, and classes has ever had any purpose other than domination, which is the necessary condition and guarantee of the possession and enjoyment of wealth.” Furthermore, “at the bottom of every war lies but a single concern: plunder, the acquisition of others’ wealth, and the subjugation of others’ labor!” To Bakunin, the State was a set of institutions which protected the money and property of the rich and patriotism both enabled the rich to divide those who they exploited and to justify wars to make themselves richer. He criticized the nationalistic and imperialistic wars waged by France, Germany and Russia in the mid 1800s. He also criticized the use of religion to rationalize this exploitation and war. Peter Kropotkin’s Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1902) was one of the first books to attack Social Darwinism, the theoretical basis of white supremacism. Kropotkin asserted that evolution was driven by cooperation and not by competition and exploitation. He challenged the idea that some people were destined to rule over others by saying that it was our natural instinct to be repulsed by injustice and exploitation. He challenged the idea that people were parochial/tribal by nature by saying that great human advances resulted from cooperation and not separatism or domination. Rudolf Rocker’s Nationalism and Culture (1937) was one of the seminal works of Anti-Racism, Anti-Fascism and Anti-Nationalism. Rocker, a German Anarcho-Syndicalist who escaped the Nazis, asserts that nationalism is the basis of Fascist and Stalinist tyranny and that white supremacist doctrine which was written to justify European aristocracy and nationalism is contradicted by all basic facts of biology, genetics and psychology. European race theorists even contradicted each other. By the turn of the century Anarchist ideas had spread rapidly outside the European working class and had become popular among the workers of Asia (in particular Korea, China and Japan) and Latin America. In Eastern Europe Anarchism became popular amongst Jewish communities and as people from these communities fled poverty and pogroms they brought Anarchist ideas into the USA and Britain. In the US the Anarchist influenced IWW was the first union to jointly organize ‘white’ workers, Black workers and Chinese immigrants. In Cuba, anti-racism was a key part of Anarchist labor organizing among freed slaves. Anarchists organized unions and fought against the Spanish occupation and the late US intervention. By the early years of t…
