---
title: "300 Million Random Assholes Voting On How You Die"
author: "R. Foxtale"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/r-foxtale-300-million-random-assholes-voting-on-how-you-die"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "R Foxtale's writing can be found on unquietpirate.wordpress.com Anarcho-Transhuman Issue #3, Nov 2016"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "r-foxtale-300-million-random-assholes-voting-on-how-you-die.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/r-foxtale-300-million-random-assholes-voting-on-how-you-die.epub"
    hosted: false
---

They’re going to implant it at the base of your skull: The fitness tracker to end all fitness trackers. It won’t hurt. It will help. It will measure your breathing, your heart rate, your blood glucose level, the current state of your immune system, and how much sleep you got last night. When you begin to feel anxious, it will play soothing music inside your head. Soothing music or a guided meditation track — your choice. (Although studies have shown that the soothing music option has the most immediate impact on cortisol levels, so that’s what we recommend.) It will interrupt your epileptic seizures before they start. It will stimulate nerve regrowth so that you can finally walk without pain. It will amp up blood oxygenation, improve muscle tone, fine tune your gait, and allow you to run a 4 minute mile. It will allow everyone to run a 4 minute mile. It’s going to put the Olympics out of business. They’re going to implant it at the base of your skull because you want one. It’s a little scary at first, sure, that’s normal. But if you think you don’t want one, you will be proven wrong. You’re not some throwback hipster with a typewriter and a flip phone. You’re not some radical crip trying to make a political statement. You’re just trying to get by day-to-day. You want to be chipped, not just because it’s how you apply for jobs and look presentable in public, but because it makes having a body easy. Fertility. Virility. Obesity. Menstrual cramps. Exhaustion. Insomnia. Schizophrenic episodes: Sorted. What’s your killer app? Your fitness chip is equipped with cutting-edge technology. Program it yourself or give the code to someone else: your personal trainer, your psychotherapist, your Dom. Of course, the NSA, the Corporation, and the Government will have golden keys as well — only to be used by responsible parties for absolute emergencies. Or routine maintenance. Regular upgrades. To protect you from hackers. To collect the anonymized meta-data that informs public health projects. And to remind you to vote. It will not tell your boss whether you actually have to pee again or if you’re just faking so you can check your phone in the bathroom. Of course it won’t. That’s illegal. It will convert your nicotine cravings into an impulse to do fifteen push-ups. You will be better. You will be stronger. You will be more free to move. Are you planning to jailbreak the fitness chip once it’s installed? Be aware this may void the warranty and exempt you from certain legal protections. Plus, those off-brand hacks aren’t very reliable. Better to submit a petition if you want something changed. There’s a process. Everything will be put to a vote. If you have any concerns, we encourage you to write to your Congressman. Dying is an incredibly unpleasant process. It takes most of us decades. Somewhere along that path, every one of us becomes disabled — which is to say that every one of us loses physical and cognitive abilities that we once had, or that the majority of people have, or that society at large believes most people ought to have even if almost nobody actually does. There is a great deal of politics that goes into how we, as individuals and as a culture, define “disability” — but, at a certain level, the raw fact remains that the physical process of dying feels fucking terrible. The desire to be a little more comfortable on our way from here to there is deeply, and legitimately, alluring. The generation and integration of new technologies is often a desperate attempt to treat our disabilities. As these technologies allow us to increase our capacity in certain ways, the space of what is considered “disabled” also grows. The opposite of disability, of course, is not “ability” — it is omnipotence. Ideally, our tools can enable us to improve, can give us “superabilities” that approach omnipotence asymptotically, but our embodied potential is never truly omni-directional. There will always be some force influencing the shape each person’s mat…
