---
title: "Belarus and Soviet Authoritarianism"
author: "Ihar Alinevich, Yavor Tarinski"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-belarus-and-soviet-authoritarianism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Interview with Ihar Alinevich"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yavor-tarinski-belarus-and-soviet-authoritarianism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-belarus-and-soviet-authoritarianism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Introduction & questions: Yavor Tarinski Ihar Alinevich is an anarchist from Belarus (a country which still lives in the Soviet era) who has payed dearly for his ideas by going through the hell of the Belarusian penal system. We had the rare opportunity to meet him and take an interview for the Greek anti-authoritarian journal Babylonia regarding the situation in his country and the libertarian movement there. What is being described below happens in real life and in 21 st century, in a country which nowadays is being considered as “civilized European state”. Ihar Alinevich is one of the victims of the 2010 wave of repressions in Belarus against anti-authoritarians. As an anarchist and active participant in demonstrations, Ihar had to leave the country in order to avoid persecution, thus fleeing to Moscow. On 28 November 2010, however, he was kidnapped by Belarusian KGB agents and brought back to Belarus, where he underwent farce trial and was found guilty of arson attacks on Belarusbank and casino “Shangri La”, as well as for throwing a flare at the General headquarters of the Belarusian armed forces during an anti-militarist demonstration in Minsk. He was sentenced to 8 years in a corrective labor colony with reinforced regime. Demonstrations in solidarity with him and other Belarusian political prisoners were organized in cities all around the world. After his release, Ihar was forced by the authorities to leave Belarus permanently. He has written a book called “On the Way to Magadan: Prisoner’s Diary” (2014), in which he describes the Belarusian regime, his nightmarish experience in prison, as well as, elaborates on his libertarian ideas. Few notes on the current political reality of Belarus After Belarus gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, social democrat Stanislav Shushkevich became head of state until 1994, when he lost from the communist Alexander Lukashenko. Lukashenko remains in power until today – winning consequently 5 presidential elections, with around 80% of the vote each time. A trusted cadre of the Communist Regime, he was a director of a kolkhoz, served in the Soviet Border Troops and was a deputy political officer in the Soviet Army. Lukashenko was the only MP to vote against the independence of Belarus from the Soviet Union in 1991. The Communist Party of Belarus is fully supporting Lukashenko’s presidency. Nowadays Belarus continues to be run in a soviet manner: in strongly authoritarian manner. Still the largest part of the economy is under state ownership. It is the only country where the KGB continues to function after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. On symbolic level, the national coat of arms maintains its soviet aesthetics with wheat ears and a red star, with only the hammer and sickle, that used to be at the middle of the symbol, to be replaced by a red map of Belarus. It is also the last country that officially celebrates the October Revolution Day: The only other country where this holiday has been observed until recent years was Kyrgyzstan, where since 2017 it was replaced by the ‘Days of Ancestral History and Memory’. Modern Belarus has been labelled as “Europe’s last dictatorship”. As Ihar writes in his book: “there is no possibility for public political expression. Absolutely all peaceful political initiatives in Belarus are harshly suppressed: it is impossible to carry out a legal picket or demonstration, an open discussion or meeting – people are detained even at punk concerts.” Tens of thousands of people are being held in prisons and in labor colonies. But its extreme authoritarian system does not stop the US and EU countries to do business with it. Belarus’s geographic position makes it an important place for the transportation of huge amounts of natural gas, oil and other raw materials from Russia towards Western Europe. In 2016 EU even lifted most sanctions it had imposed on the regime, due to Brussels’ increasing economic interests in the country, which led to inten…
