---
title: "Free Cities"
author: "Eirik Eiglad, Murray Bookchin"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/murray-bookchin-free-cities"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Communalism and the Left"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "murray-bookchin-free-cities.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/murray-bookchin-free-cities.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Creating Free Cities      Introduction      The Ecological Crisis and the Need to Remake Society        The Social Roots of the Ecological Crisis        Class, Hierarchies, and Politics        The Myth of a “Minimal State”        Beyond Statism and Privatism      Nationalism and the “National Question”        A Historical Overview        Nationalism and the Left        Two Approaches to the National Question        Nationalism and World War Two        Struggles for “National Liberation”        Toward a New Internationalism        Seeking an Alternative      Nationalism and the Great Revolution      The Historical Importance of the City        The Erosion of Citizenship        Oppression and Liberation        Reason and History        Cities in History        Quietism or Confrontation?      Anarchism as Individualism        The Individualistic Core of Anarchism        The Essence of Anarchy        Anarchy or Libertarian Municipalism?      Anarchism, Power, and Government        Not Every Government is a State        Libertarian Government in Revolutionary Spain        The Downfall of Spanish Anarchism        Addressing Power      The Revolutionary Politics of Libertarian Municipalism        The Revolutionary Municipality        Recreating a Political Sphere        Criticisms of Assembly Democracy        Class And Trans-Class Issues        Challenges for Our Movements      The Future of the Left        From Classicism to Decadence        Moribund or Mature Capitalism?        A Period of Transition        Assessing The Revolutionary Tradition        Capitalism and Globalization        Beyond a Politics of Protest        A Left for the Future        Programmatic Issues and Prospects        An Ethical Compass for the Left        The Libertarian Municipality        The Radical Challenge      Toward a Communalist Approach        What is Communalism?        Municipal Freedoms and Autonomy        Communalist Organization What would a free municipality look like? What would its basic institutions be? What material, political, and cultural preconditions must be met before we can arrive at them, and who will be the agents for social change? What kinds of movements and political efforts are required to create them? These questions strike to the core of Murray Bookchin’s political project, particularly as he refined it during the 1980s and 1990s. The immediate and ultimate aim of the political approach he advanced is to create free cities or municipalities, and as such it is meant to provide both a clear social ideal as well as a concrete political praxis. By advancing libertarian municipalism, Bookchin hoped to see new civic movements emerge and claim control over their communities. Political involvement at the local level is necessary, he insisted, to guide and inspire a process of municipal empowerment . This process and the institutions it entails, he hoped, may provide a focal point for rallying progressive social movements to the common cause of political freedom in its most expansive sense. To a very large extent, creating free cities is about developing free citizens, in whose hands power over society should be squarely placed: it must reside in popular assemblies and not in bureaucracies, parliaments, or corporate boards. Libertarian municipalism is an attempt to create the political structures necessary for this shift in power. Democratized and radicalized, municipal confederations would emerge, it is hoped, as a dual power to challenge and ultimately replace the nation state and the market. A lifelong radical and a fertile thinker, Murray Bookchin had been politically active since the 1930s; first in Communist parties, trade unions, and Trotskyist groups, then during the 1960s in the civil rights movement, urban ecology projects, anarchist groups, the radical student movement, and community groups; and later in the 1970s and 1980s in anti-nuclear movements and the early Green movement. Only in the early 1990s did his health …
