---
title: "Assembly Line"
author: "Ret Marut"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/b-traven-assembly-line"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This is an early Traven story, taken, in an uncredited translation, (probably by Traven himself — I have Anglicised the spelling) from The Night Visitor and other stories, Allison &amp; Busby, 1983 — a volume long out of print. The original German version — Der Grossindustrielle — was first publishe"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "b-traven-assembly-line.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/b-traven-assembly-line.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Mr E.L.Winthrop of New York was on vacation in the Republic of Mexico. It wasn’t long before he realised that this strange and really wild country had not yet been fully explored by Rotarians and Lions, who are forever conscious of their glorious mission on earth. Therefore he considered it his duty as a good American citizen to play his part in correcting this oversight. In search of opportunities to indulge in his new avocation, he left the beaten track and ventured into regions not especially mentioned, and hence not recommended, by travel agents to foreign tourists. So it happened that one day he found himself in a little, quaint Indian village somewhere in the State of Oaxaca. Walking along the dusty main street of this pueblocito, which knew nothing a pavements, drainage, plumbing, or of any means of artificial light save candles or pine splinters, he met with an Indian squatting on the earthen-floor front porch of a palm hut, a so-called jacalito. The Indian was busy making little baskets from bast and from all kinds of fibres gathered by him in the immense tropical bush which surrounded the village on all sides. The material used had not only been well prepared for its purpose but was also richly coloured with dyes that the basket-maker himself extracted from various native plants, barks, roots and from certain insects by a process known only to him and the members of his family. His principal business, however, was not producing baskets. He was a peasant who lived on what the small property he possessed — less than fifteen acres of not too fertile soil — would yield, after much sweat and labour and after constantly worrying over the most wanted and best suited distribution of rain sunshine and wind and the changing balance of birds and insects beneficial or harmful to his crops. Baskets he made when there was nothing else for him to do in the fields, because he was unable to dawdle. After all the sale of his baskets, though to a rather limited degree only, added to the small income he received from his little farm. In spite of being by profession just a plain peasant, it was clearly seen from the small baskets he made that at heart he was an artist, a true and accomplished artist. Each basket looked as if covered all over with the most beautiful sometimes fantastic ornaments, flowers, butterflies, birds, squirrels, antelopes, tigers and a score of other animals of the wilds. Yet, the most amazing thing was that these decorations, all of them symphonies of colour, were not painted on the baskets but were instead actually part of the baskets themselves. Bast and fibres dyed in dozens of different colours were so cleverly — one must actually say intrinsically — interwoven that those attractive designs appeared on the inner part of the basket as well as on the outside. Not by painting but by weaving were those highly artistic designs achieved. This performance he accomplished without ever looking at any sketch or pattern. While working on a basket these designs came to light as if by magic, and as long as a basket was not entirely finished one could not perceive what in this case or that the decoration would be like. People in the market town who bought these baskets would use them for sewing baskets, or to decorate tables with or window sills or to hold little things to keep them from lying around. Women put their jewellery in them or flowers or little dolls. There were in fact a hundred and two ways they might serve certain purposes in a household or in a lady’s own room. Whenever the Indian had finished about twenty of the baskets he took them to town on market day. Sometimes he would already be on his way shortly after midnight because he owned only a burro to ride on, and if the burro had gone astray the day before, as happened frequently, he would have to walk the whole way into town and back again. At the market he had to pay twenty centavos in taxes to sell his wares. Each basket cost him between twenty and thirty…
