---
title: "Exiled to Siberia"
author: "Leo Tolstoy"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-exiled-to-siberia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Original text from RevoltLib.com, 2021. AKA: God Sees the Truth, But Waits."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "leo-tolstoy-exiled-to-siberia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leo-tolstoy-exiled-to-siberia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In the city of Vladimir lived a young merchant named Askenov. He owned two stores and a dwelling-house. Askenov was attractive in person, blond, curly-headed, and a lover of jollity and song. He drank in his youth, and when intoxicated he quarreled. But when once married he drank very rarely. One day in summer he decided to attend the fair at Nijni-Novogorod. As he was bidding his family farewell, his wife said to him: "Ivan, do not go to-day; I had a bad dream about you." Askenov began to laugh, and replied: "You fear I will commit some folly at the fair." His wife answered: "I do not myself exactly know what I fear; only I had a bad dream. I saw you as you came from the city. You took off your cap, and all at once I saw that your head was quite white." Askenov began to laugh more cheerily still. "Ah well! it is a good sign," he said. "I shall do a good business, and will bring you a beautiful present." So he took leave of his family and departed. Midway in his journey he met an acquaintance, a merchant, with whom he lodged that night. They drank tea together, and went to sleep in adjoining rooms. Askenov was not a heavy sleeper. He awoke in the middle of the night, and, to travel more comfortably in the coolness of the morning, aroused the postilion, and ordered him to put the horses before the wagon. Then he entered the dim office, paid the landlord, and went away. After having traveled forty miles, he stopped again to feed the horses, rested himself at the hotel, went out upon the door-step and had his samovar prepared. He took a guitar and began to play. All at once a troika with its gong arrives. A state functionary with two soldiers descends, approaches Askenov, and inquires of him who he is and whither he is going. Askenov excuses himself from replying, but asks him to take some tea. The official, however, continues to press his questions. Where had he slept the night before? Was he alone with the merchant? Why had he left the inn so precipitantly? Askenov, surprised by these interrogatories, related what had taken place, then said: "Why do you ask me so many questions? I am neither a thief nor a brigand. I am traveling on my own business, and no one has a right to question me." The official then called his soldiers and replied: "I am a police commissioner, and if I question you it is because the merchant with whom you passed the night was murdered. Show your baggage -- and you others, search it." They entered the hotel-office, took his trunk and satchel, opened them, and in the latter found a knife. The officer exclaimed, "Whose is this knife?" Askenov turned to look, saw a blade covered with blood, and became terror-stricken. "And why this blood on the knife?" Askenov tried to reply, but he could not utter a word. "I -- I do not know -- I -- A knife -- I -- It is not mine," he stammered at last. The police commissioner said: "This morning the merchant was found murdered in bed. No one except yourself could have committed the crime. The rooms were locked from the inside, and within was no one but you and he. Moreover, a knife covered with blood has been found in your bag. Besides, your crime can be read in your face. Confess at once how you killed him, and how much money you stole." Askenov called God to witness that he was not guilty; that he had not seen the merchant after having taken tea with him; that he had only his own money, eight thousand rubles, and that the knife was not his. But his voice was husky, his face had become pale, and he trembled like a criminal. The officer called his soldiers, and ordered them to bind him and place him in the carriage. When they had done so, Askenov, with his feet in irons, crossed himself and began to weep. They took away all his effects, with his money, and put him in prison in the neighboring city. An inquest was held at Vladimir. All the merchants and inhabitants declared that Askenov, though he had been in the habit of drinking and amusing himself when a young man, was re…
