---
title: "Capitalism Is Killing the Earth"
author: "John Warwick"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-warwick-capitalism-is-killing-the-earth-1"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Anarchist Guide to Ecology"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-warwick-capitalism-is-killing-the-earth-1.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-warwick-capitalism-is-killing-the-earth-1.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction      Climate Change and Capitalism        Case studies: energy and housing under capitalism          Energy Systems          Housing          Resource Depletion      False Solutions        Climate summits and nation carbon budgets        Carbon trading and carbon capture        Green and ethical capitalism        State Control        The divestment movement        Primitivism and Technology        Population Control      An Anarchist Ecology        Work        Production        Intellectual Property        Sharing Economy        Food      How Do We Get There?      Conclusion We are in a period of crisis that we in More Economically Developed Countries cannot yet see. The signs are there if you look hard enough but at the moment the water is still flowing, the crops are still reliable the ski lifts are still running. The first wave of climate refugees are trying to make their way into Europe but they are being dismissed as 'economic migrants' or those displaced by war. In all likelihood, More Economically Developed Countries will not feel the effects of climate change for some time; our relative wealth will push the impacts onto those who haven't the means to adapt or whose local climates were less temperate to begin with. The longer we wait to act, however, the bigger the coming crunch will be. Collectively, More Economically Developed Countries are responsible for the overwhelming majority of cumulative carbon emissions and will have to radically change their energy and transport systems if an ecological disaster is to be avoided. Who will bear the brunt of the costs and who will get rich from this process is sadly predictable. The working class in More Economically Developed Countries and most people in Less Economically Developed Countries will pay for the fossil fuel addiction and growth-at-all-costs model of the capitalist system. We have already begun to see this happen in the black, working-class communities devastated by natural disasters in the USA and flooding killing thousands in Bangladesh. Capitalism relies on constantly increasing accumulation of profits. This has been achieved historically by appropriations (a polite term for thefts) both internal and external to the nation state. Internally, in Europe from the fifteenth century onwards, this has followed the model of stealing common land from the people to create a proletarian class dependent on wage labour to support itself. Externally, this expansion was tied to a move outside Europe's borders to exploit natural resources and labour in other locations. Thus colonialism and capitalism were, from the beginning, linked to processes of resource extraction and accumulation. Capitalism is now in crisis; with so few areas beyond its reach, there are no easy sources of growth to appropriate, and the ability of the earth's ecosystems to accommodate further growth is being seriously questioned. How then to continue growth and profit? In More Economically Developed Countries, we are seeing a fresh attack on workers' rights, with more precarious jobs, lower pay and poorer social care. In Less Economically Developed Countries, the neoliberal development model is pushed with privatisation and financial deregulation extracting the most profit for the capitalists. We write this pamphlet to discuss the environmental problems that capitalism has created, with a focus on climate change and the false solutions offered up to us. There has been wider understanding of environmental issues since mainstream publications such as Silent Spring, Gaia and An Inconvenient Truth; however, an anti-capitalist critique has been lacking. Capitalism is a system reliant on the total exploitation of nature; whether that be sacrificing our clean water to frack for hydrocarbons or sacrificing our children to the production line. We must develop our ideas of what a different future may look like outside the constraints of both capital and fossil fuels. We must also critique the fal…
