---
title: "Aufhebengate"
author: "TPTG, Sam FantoSamotnaf"
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sam-fantosamotnaf-cop-out"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Cop-out was retrieved on January 23, 2013 from dialectical-delinquents.com The first open letter was retrieved on January 26, 2013 from blog.occupiedlondon.org The second open letter was retrieved on January 26, 2013 from www.indymedia.org.uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sam-fantosamotnaf-cop-out.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sam-fantosamotnaf-cop-out.epub"
    hosted: false
---

   Sam FantoSamotnaf: Cop-out The significance of Aufheben gate (2013)      Introduction      Good cop bad cop        Peeling back the mask        Evenin’ all        Far From The Madding Crowd Controllers        Killing Us Softly With Their Siren Song:      Academia, sociology & the muddle class        Extract from “The Strange Case Of Dr.Johnny And Mr.Drury”        Some Schizophrenic “Radicals”      Anarcho-leftism and the politics of Libcom      Frayed threads of friendship      Loose ends: some extra bits and pieces        Going About It All Wrong        Aufheben’s Secret “Critique”        Bewildering Perspectives      Appendix        Links to various texts written or co-written by (or referring to) John Drury        Stott        Other texts on crowd control    TPTG: An Open Letter to the British internationalist/anti-authoritarian/activist/protest/street scenes (and to all those concerned with the progress of our enemies) (2011)      The new psychology of crowd behaviour & knowledge-based public order policing      Turning theory into practice      Mainstream sociologists and social psychologists of deviancy      What about all that?    TPTG: Second open letter to those concerned with the progress of our enemies (including some necessary clarifications and refutations of the cop cunsultant’s defence team’s claims) (2011)        Time spent on analysing the progress of our enemies is not wasted time        “It all could have been resolved via email” — a member of Libcom collective        The supposed harmlessness of knowledge-base public order policing and its technocratic designers        Why let the facts get in the way of a “good samaritan” story?        Interlude: “We have ways of making you talk” (quote from Aufheben no. 12)        Why let the facst get in the way of a “good samaritan story? Part two        The great Libcom swindle        Diversions and digressions Whilst the criticisms made here use Aufheben gate as their starting-point (because of the appallingly pathetic nature of the UK “libertarian communist” milieu revealed by this event) it is not necessary to know all the ins and outs of it to be able to understand most of the conclusions developed from it, nor is it really necessary to be that interested in Aufhebengate to find these conclusions useful. It’s simply a matter of recognising an objective event and developing from there…developing our critique of modern cop practice, of academia, of the misery of the UK so-called libertarian communist milieu, of our analysis of the contradictions of friendship and more… Could there be anything more boring than digging up Aufheben gate again? Only one thing more boring — not digging it up again. It’s the elephant in the room of the “revolutionary milieu” that everyone wants to ignore or pretend was just a mirage and will anyway go away of its own accord so they can carry on as normal. The shit it’s dumped in the corner reeks a stench ignored by blocking out one’s sense of smell and one’s sense altogether. Clearing this up is filthy work, but someone’s got to do it. So, let’s sum up. From Millbank to Quebec, via Athens, Tunis, Suez, Oakland, Barcelona and countless other places, the crowd has confronted the forces of the state with varying degrees of success and failure, of non-violent and violent tactics, over the last couple of years. Ostensibly these outbreaks of class war have been supported and encouraged by the “libertarian communist” section of the supposed movement against capitalism, including those publishing extreme anti-state and anti-commodity theory. So when, in January 2011, the TPTG [1] , a small Greek group, discovered that John Drury, a significant “theoretician” and long-standing member of the self-styled anti-state communist group Aufheben , had been helping the cops with a divide and rule strategy for the very same crowds that this group ostensibly wanted to contribute to radicalising, they were shocked and sent out, to their English speaking fri…
