---
title: "Before the Burial"
author: "Octave Mirbeau"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/octave-mirbeau-before-the-burial"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated from the French by Robert Helms; “Avant L’Enterrement” first appeared in the Paris newspaper Gil Blas on April 19, 1887. Original text from RevoltLib.com, 2021."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "octave-mirbeau-before-the-burial.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/octave-mirbeau-before-the-burial.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Mr. Poivret got down from his wagon in front of the shop owned by his son-in-law Pierre Gasselin, tied the horse to a thick iron ring and, after three times checking the tightness of the tether’s knot, he entered the butcher shop cracking his horse-whip. “Anyone there?” he yelled. A dog, sleeping with its body stretched across a sunny patch of floor, got up with a low groan and then laid itself out a little farther out of the way. The store was deserted, and since it was Thursday, the meat rack was pretty close to empty. A quarter of nearly black beef lay on the block, covered with flies, and a lamb’s heart, split down the middle, was hanging from the ceiling on one of the movable hooks. In a corner, in the bottom of a copper basin, some bloody bones and heaps of yellowing grease were beginning to spoil. From that direction an odor rose up: that weakening smell of death that sickens the stomach in a hospital or at a mass grave. “Anybody home?” repeated Poivret. “Hey, Gasselin! Where are you?” Gasselin came out of the Café Gadaud, located just across the street from his shop. He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, relit his pipe, and rushed over saying “Here I am! Here I am!” He was without a hat, his chubby face all red and clean shaven and his sleeves rolled up almost to the elbows. His white cloth apron, stained by a constellation of red splotches, covered him from the blue scarf loosely wrapped around his neck almost to his wooden clogs. The tops of his feet were bare, and a sharpening rod danced along his left leg at the end of a steel chain. He walked up to his father-in-law and offered his hand. “You’re lookin’ good —how are you?” “Not bad, my boy,” said the older man, “not bad at all.” “Can I get some oats for your horse?” “Hell no! He ate and drank this morning. I’m coming from the Chassant fair, my boy!” “Now that’s a nice fair!” Gasselin declared. Poivret nodded his head and answered tersely. “Yeah, yeah. Not so good, not so bad, either. The prices are decent.” Changing his tone, he said, “Little Auguste gave me the bad news when I got to Mansonniere.” “Yep...” chirped Gasselin. “Yes indeed!” “Anyhow, I’ve gotten unhitched, I’ve given only four quarts of oats to my horse, and here I am, finally.” “You wanna go freshen up?” asked Pierre Gasselin. “Well, I can’t say no to that. My mouth feels like an oven. Anyway, it’s no joke, then? She’s up’n died, your wife?” The butcher took his pipe and shook out the ashes on the point of one of his clogs. “She’s really dead,” he said. “Last night at the stroke of ten. Yeah, or maybe ten-thirty. Well, around there somewhere —whatever!” “Last night?” asked Poivret, rocking his head from side to side. “Well, well, well! Did you see it? What did she catch? Was it a case of rabies, or blood poisoning?” “It wasn’t blood poisoning, Mr. P, and not an infection either,” explained Gasselin. “It was a stomach thing. Her stomach puffed out. But I mean way out! And she cried and cried. Jeez, the way she cried! Worse yet, now she’s dead. Can you believe it? But there was something else I was thinkin’...” “What was that, my boy?” “Oh, well, here it is. Fifteen days ago, or maybe twelve, maybe more, maybe less —well let’s say fifteen days ago, your daughter was givin’ me some shit. I think she called me a pig and a drunk because of a party I had with the Bacoup boys and the Maute boys. Anyway, I told her to shut up —but gently, without anger. With love, actually! But sure enough, she plagued me with more bullshit, only worse this time! The really bad thing was that I gave her a good smack, and a kick in the gut. But hey, look, Mr. P, I was only foolin’ around. I didn’t mean any harm. I wouldn’t hurt her. Anyway, where was I? The next morning, she was complaining, ‘I don’t know what’s in my stomach. There’s gotta be something in my stomach. An animal —a big animal that’s eating me alive!’ This didn’t stop her from taking care of the customers, though. Then, the day before yesterday, it cam…
