---
title: "Anarchist and anti-fascist prisoners in Russia"
author: "Antti Rautiainen"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/antti-rautiainen-anarchist-and-anti-fascist-prisoners-in-russia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Presentation in Apertus squat of Agrinion, Greece, 21 June 2025. Retrieved on 25th September 2025 from avtonom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "antti-rautiainen-anarchist-and-anti-fascist-prisoners-in-russia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/antti-rautiainen-anarchist-and-anti-fascist-prisoners-in-russia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Shift from Protest to Sabotage        Prominent Individual Cases        Support Structures for Anti-War Direct Actions Prisoners Since the beginning of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, domestic anti-war resistance has shifted from mass protest to underground direct action. As legal restrictions and surveillance have escalated, individuals across the country have taken part in sabotage operations targeting military and government infrastructure. These actions, such as arson and railway disruption, have led to long prison terms under anti-terrorism legislation. In 2022, according to OVD-Info, over 19,000 people were arrested for anti-war protest actions across Russia. With the government cracking down severely on all public dissent, these numbers plummeted in subsequent years: 270 in 2023, 41 in 2024, and only 10 until May of 2025. While protest in the streets has become nearly impossible, acts of sabotage have emerged as an important method of anti-war struggle. According to Activatica.org, in 2023, approximately 230 direct actions were recorded; in 2024, the figure was 145. While some attacks, particularly near the Ukrainian border, are connected to operations by Ukrainian armed forces and intelligence, the majority occur deeper within Russia and appear to be carried out by unaffiliated activists acting independently. It is often possible to differentiate these types of actions by professionalism – for example, use of assassinations or high-tech explosives indicates work of Ukrainian secret services; Molotov cocktails indicate DIY anti-militarist activists. However, statistics of Activatica do not differentiate between these types of actions. Activatica does, however, differentiate actions instigated by the Ukrainian online scamming industry. Ukraine has a sizable business of online scamming, and occasionally scammers attempt to revenge on Russians. Scammers are stealing money from online banks of often elderly people, and they demand acts of sabotage, such as Molotov cocktails, from victims in exchange for returning their savings. Victims are pretty much always caught, and they receive prison sentences. Activatica has recorded 100 such sabotage actions in addition to the numbers of real actions. This practice is unfortunately a factor discrediting proper anti-war direct actions, as Russian propaganda is claiming that all the actions are due to scammed individuals or paid by Ukrainian secret services. Among the groups that have publicly claimed responsibility for some sabotage actions is the Combat Organization of Anarcho-Communists (BOAK). BOAK is a network drawing from a new Russian insurrectionary anarchist tradition that appeared in the year 2008, partly inspired by the Greek December uprising that year. BOAK has published claims of railway sabotage and other disruptions. No member of BOAK has ever been caught, but many have been forced to escape from Russia, which has led to decreased activity inside Russia. Now BOAK is attempting to spread guidelines of safety for emerging new underground cells and individuals appearing inside Russia. Ruslan Sidiki , formerly active in an anarchist farming cooperative in the Leningrad region, attempted to destroy a strategic bomber with drones in the Ryazan region. The drone was disabled by electronic defenses, but he later succeeded in destroying a freight train in the Ryazan region. Though he contacted Ukrainian intelligence to discuss tactics, he rejected material support from them. Ruslan admitted to his actions and was sentenced to 29 years in prison in May 2025. His case reflects the high-end of sentencing now applied to politically motivated actions – a typical murder sentence in Russia is 10 years in prison. Alexey Rozhkov threw Molotov cocktails at a military enlistment office in the suburb of Yekaterinburg, 12 th of March 2022. This was only 16 days after the beginning of the full-scale invasion, making his one of the earliest direct actions, inspirin…
