---
title: "Athens: the events that gave rise to the incidents of New Smyrna"
author: "Union of Green Libertarians"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/union-of-green-libertarians-athens-the-events-that-gave-rise-to-the-incidents-of-new-smyrna"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 13 March 2020 from prasinoieleutheriakoi.wordpress.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "union-of-green-libertarians-athens-the-events-that-gave-rise-to-the-incidents-of-new-smyrna.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/union-of-green-libertarians-athens-the-events-that-gave-rise-to-the-incidents-of-new-smyrna.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Translator’s note : We live in dark times here in Greece. The ghost of J unta haunts the country ever since Mitsotakis and his party came to power. Using the measures against the pandemic as a tool of control and repression and giving the police even greater power has worsened the situation. This text gives a glimpse of the fascistitation of the country by an Athenian comrade who witnessed all the events that led to the recent fiery riots that took and still take place in Greece’s capital city and are now spreading in the rest of the country. As an anarchist who lives in Athens I will try to go back in time to just some months ago, for the sake of brevity, so that we can understand how we ended up on the recent events at New Smyrna. The ever more growing policing under the pretext of the pandemic has made its presence felt in every neighbourhood of Athens for some time now. Gradually and methodically an attempt of heavy repression and restriction is being made not just on us anarchists but on every citizen who protests against the regime… Already since the summer cops from team DRASI raided shops in Exarcheia terrorising the people with motorbikes and causing physical destruction, while hunting and beating the passer-bys with batons. All these were prompted by the late attempt to re-occupy certain anarchist spaces in Dervenion street, where a solidarity concert was taking place. The outcome was injured passer-bys and damaged shops, where stun grenades were thrown at and arrests were made. Since the autumn the attempt on silencing our voices was intensified, as they were passing last-moment laws about total prohibitions of gatherings for the entire country, to avoid rallies, even minor ones. Their aim was the big cities of course, where every protest faced the repressive forces before they even started. On November at Syntagma riot police arrested women who participated in a peaceful and symbolic rally for the day against violence against women. Not only did the cops made arrests, they also terrorised them provocatively by not explaining them the reason behind their arrests, whilst the women followed the measures against the pandemic. At the same time members of the movement against racism reacted on the arrests by throwing flyers, but they got arrested too. On December, at the city centre, at the memorial protest for the killing of Alexis Grigoropoulos the cops showed once again that they are not let up by any peaceful protest or act of commemoration. Chemical strikes took the lead here too, and they even chased the protestors until they reached the entrances of their apartment buildings and homes. The beatings of course were not restricted to the protesters but were extended to journalists too, who constantly shouted that they are reporters of the events. The cops arrested violently many passer-bys without reason, just because they were present on site and they shut their mouths so that they wouldn’t yell inside the police cars. Even if the protestors abided by the measures against the pandemic or even if they were sole individuals – like Alexis’ professor himself – they faithfully executed the order to prevent the protest, even preventing people from laying down a flower on the site where the student left his last breath. The highlight of the events was when the cops desecrated a banquet that was left on the said site; they were smashing it against each other, broke it down and threw it away… Since January, the attempts of repressing the protests against the law for university policing were intensified. The traffic on the streets was disrupted multiple times, the metros were closed, riot police units encircled us. We received beatings with batons, students and protestors alike, while our eyes were burning and our breath was cut by the chemicals that they were throwing on us. The intentions of the cops for the alleged protection of the universities was clear… Both Athens and Thessaloniki are leading cities in rallies and one …
