---
title: "Demanding the Impossible"
author: "Peter H. Marshall"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-h-marshall-demanding-the-impossible"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A History of Anarchism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-h-marshall-demanding-the-impossible.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-h-marshall-demanding-the-impossible.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction    PART ONE: Anarchism in Theory      The River of Anarchy      Society and the State        Society        Natural Order        State and Government        Liberal Democracy        The Marxist State        Law        The Nation-State      Freedom and Equality        Authority        Power        Equality    PART TWO: Forerunners of Anarchism      Taoism and Buddhism        Taoism        Buddhism      The Greeks      Christianity      The Middle Ages        Mystical and Millenarian Anarchists      The English Revolution      The French Renaissance and Enlightenment        François Rabelais        Etienne de la Boétie        Gabriel de Foigny        Fénelon        The Enlightenment        Jean Meslier        Morelly        Denis Diderot        Jean-Jacques Rousseau      The British Enlightenment        Jonathan Swift        Edmund Burke        Thomas Paine    PART THREE: Great Libertarians      French Libertarians        Marquis de Sade        Charles Fourier      German Libertarians        Wilhelm von Humboldt        Friedrich Nietzsche      British Libertarians        John Stuart Mill        Herbert Spencer        Edward Carpenter        William Morris        Oscar Wilde      American Libertarians        Ralph Waldo Emerson        Walt Whitman        Henry David Thoreau    PART FOUR: Classic Anarchist Thinkers      William Godwin: The Lover of Order        Philosophy        Human Nature        Ethics        Politics        Economics        Education        Free Society        Means of Reform      Max Stirner: The Conscious Egoist        Philosophy        Ethics        Politics      Pierre-Joseph Proudhon: The Philosopher of Poverty      Michael Bakunin. The Fanatic of Freedom        Philosophy        Human Nature        Liberty and Authority        The State        Free Society        Revolutionary Strategy ANARCHY IS TERROR, the creed of bomb-throwing desperadoes wishing to pull down civilization. Anarchy is chaos, when law and order collapse and the destructive passions of man run riot. Anarchy is nihilism, the abandonment of all moral values and the twilight of reason. This is the spectre of anarchy that haunts the judge’s bench and the government cabinet. In the popular imagination, in our everyday language, anarchy is associated with destruction and disobedience but also with relaxation and freedom. The anarchist finds good company, it seems, with the vandal, iconoclast, savage, brute, ruffian, hornet, viper, ogre, ghoul, wild beast, fiend, harpy and siren.1 He has been immortalized for posterity in Joseph Conrad’s novel The Secret Agent (1907) as a fanatic intent on bringing down governments and civilized society. Not surprisingly, anarchism has had a bad press. It is usual to dismiss its ideal of pure liberty at best as utopian, at worst, as a dangerous chimera. Anarchists are dismissed as subversive madmen, inflexible extremists, dangerous terrorists on the one hand, or as naive dreamers and gentle saints on the other. President Theodore Roosevelt declared at the end of the nineteenth century: ‘Anarchism is a crime against the whole human race and all mankind should band against anarchists.’2 In fact, only a tiny minority of anarchists have practised terror as a revolutionary strategy, and then chiefly in the 1890s when there was a spate of spectacular bombings and political assassinations during a period of complete despair. Although often associated with violence, historically anarchism has been far less violent than other political creeds, and appears as a feeble youth pushed out of the way by the inarching hordes of fascists and authoritarian communists. It has no monopoly on violence, and compared to nationalists, populists, and monarchists has been comparatively peaceful. Moreover, a tradition which encompasses such thoughtful and peaceable men as Godwin, Proudhon, Kropotkin, and Tolstoy can hardly be dismissed as inherently terroristic and nihilistic. Of the classic anarchist thinkers, only Ba…
