---
title: "An Interview with Ted Kaczynski"
author: "Ted Kaczynski"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ted-kaczynski-an-interview-with-ted-kaczynski"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "by Blackfoot Valley Dispatch"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ted-kaczynski-an-interview-with-ted-kaczynski.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ted-kaczynski-an-interview-with-ted-kaczynski.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In 1999 I requested an interview with Theodore J. Kaczynski for the Blackfoot Valley Dispatch which he kindly granted. The interview took place that same year at the United States Penitentiary, Administrative Maximum, Florence, Colorado. BVD: Well… TJK: Well. BVD: Well, why did you leave your job at Berkeley and your career in mathematics? TJK: At the time I accepted the job at Berkeley, I had already decided that I would keep it for at most two years before leaving it to go live in the woods. The fact is that I never at any time felt satisfied with the idea of spending my life as just a mathematician and nothing more. Ever since my early teens I had dreamed of escaping from civilization—as in going to live on an uninhabited island or in some other wild place. The trouble was that I didn’t know how to go about it, and it was extremely difficult to work up the nerve to cut loose from my civilized moorings and take off to the woods. It’s very difficult because sometimes we don’t know how much the choices we make are governed by the expectations of people around us, and the fact that we go and do something other people would regard as mad—it’s very difficult to do. Furthermore, I didn’t know where to go really. But at about the beginning of my last year at the University of Michigan I went through a kind of crisis. You could say that the psychological chains with which society binds us sort of broke for me. After that I was sure that I had the courage to break away from the system, to take off and just go into some wild place and try to live there. When I went to Berkeley, I never went there with the intention of continuing there indefinitely. I took the job at Berkeley only to earn some money to get started with, to buy a piece of land. BVD: You said that when you were in your early teens you had dreams of going to live in an uninhabited place. Do you recall anything that led you to have those dreams? Something you saw or experienced? TJK: Certainly things I read led me in that direction. Robinson Crusoe, for one thing. And then when I was maybe 11 of 12, somewhere in around there, I read some anthropology books about Neanderthal man and speculations about the way they lived and so forth. I became very interested in reading about that stuff and at some point asked myself why I wanted to read more about this material. At some point it dawned on me that what I really wanted was not to read more about these things but to actually live that way. BVD: It’s interesting that these things impacted you so strongly that you actually acted on them. What do you think it was about the lives or lifestyles of Crusoe and Neanderthal man that appealed to you? TJK: At the time I don’t think I knew why I was attracted to those ways of life. I now think it had a great deal to with freedom and personal autonomy. BVD: Those things must appeal to many people. So, why not everyone who…? TJK: I think a lot of people are attracted to these things, but they aren’t especially determined to actually break away from their ties and actually go and do something like that. Robinson Crusoe is supposed to be one of the most widely read books that’s ever been written. So it’s obviously attractive to many people. [An investigator for my case] said that she herself was very interested in the way of life I adopted in Montana and that many other people to whom she talked about my case were also very interested in it. And many people that her investigators talked to thought that they envied me. As a matter of fact, one of the FBI agents who arrested me said “I really envy your way of life up here.” So, there are a lot of people who react that way, but they just sort of drift with the tide and don’t come to a point where they break away. BVD: When you broke away, you went to Lincoln, Montana. Why Lincoln? TJK: Well, first of all I applied for a lease on a piece of crown land in British Columbia. After, I think, over a year, they turned it down. I spent the next winter, …
