---
title: "Escape from the Nineteenth Century and Other Essays"
author: "Hakim Bey"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-escape-from-the-nineteenth-century-and-other-essays"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Fourier, Marx, Proudhon, Nietzsche"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-lamborn-wilson-escape-from-the-nineteenth-century-and-other-essays.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-escape-from-the-nineteenth-century-and-other-essays.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Acknowledgements      Fourier! — Or, the Utopian Poetics        APPENDIX A: THE HYMN TO DAWN (PHS II 109FF.)        APPENDIX B: THE 1000 FLOWER SERIES        APPENDIX C: “HARMONICON”, BY STEVEN TAYLOR        APPENDIX D:        APPENDIX E, 1997: NOTES ON FOURIER’S THEORY OF THE FOUR MOVEMENTS      Marx and Proudhon Escape from the Nineteenth Century      The Shamanic Trace        1. Birth of a Notion        2. Machinations        3. Wild Man        4. Emblematick Mounds        5. Real Donnybrook        6. Unseen Tracks        7. Hidden Imam        8. Nineteenth Century Escapism        9. The Hieroglyphic Map      A Nietzschean Coup d’état        I. Introduction        II Cumantsa        III. The Young Hospodar        IV. The Coup d’Etat        V. Brief History of an Evanescent Event        VI. Nietzschean Utopia        VII. End And Aftermath An earlier version of the essay on Fourier was performed, with music by Steven Taylor, at the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics at Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado, in July 1992. Subsequently that version appeared in Disembodied Poetics: Annals of the Jack Kerouac School , edited by Anne Waldman and Andrew Schelling (Albequerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1994). My thanks to the editors and publishers for permission to re-use this material for the new and expanded version published here. The idea of the eternal return of the nineteenth century originated long ago in a schtick by Jake Rabinowitz that he and I worked up into a sketch and published in our zine, The Moorish Science Monitor . The present essay, “Marx and Proudhon Escape from the Nineteenth Century” is dedicated to my comrade Mark Sullivan because he loaned me all the books. (I’ve still got them!) The “Emblematick Mounds” section of “The Shamanic Trace” emerged from several happy “seasons” with the ad-hoc “Avocational Archaeology Group” at Dreamtime Village in West Lima, Wisconsin; group members are thanked individually in the notes to that section. But I should emphasize that the Group would not have existed without the advice and help of two major “informants”: Professor J. Scherz of the University of Wisconsin at Madison, and Merlin Redcloud, a Ho-Chunk (Winnebago) lore-master. Thanks to them, the attempt to interpret Effigy Mound Culture was transformed from idle sightseeing into an intellectual adventure. My interpretations (and mistakes), however, are mine and no one else’s—although I do not believe that my interpretations clash with Scherz’s Pre-Columbian Contact theories, nor with the wisdom of the Winnebago Elders. So little interpretive work has been done on the Mounds that there exists, I believe, room for any number of competing and complementary “readings" and cross-fertilizations. In any case all agree that the Mounds must be preserved , and/or restored, lest nothing remain to be interpreted. After finishing the section of “The Shamanic Trace” dealing with “left-wing Hermeticism” I came across two works that would have vastly improved my treatment of the subject. James H. Billington’s Fire in the Minds of Men: Origins of the Revolutionary Faith (New York: Basic Books, 1980); chapter 1 especially provides a wealth of information and bibliography on Hermetic rebels, filtered through the author’s strange CIA-informed conspiracy theory of the occult roots of the Left. The second work is Access to western Esotericism by Antoine Faivre (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994), especially Book One, chapters 3-5. Faivre is the leading French scholar of Hermeticism, and has an interesting take on left- and rightwing brands of esotericism; his bibliography is also useful. I hope to pursue this subject in my forthcoming book Hieroglyphica: Hermeticism, Iconoclasm, and Money . I must thank Jordan Zinovich for introducing me to carto(grapho)mancer Adele Haft, who introduced me to her student K. Cheppaikode, who drew the excellent maps in “A Nietzschaen Coup d’État”. Thanks to Alex Trotter for…
