---
title: "A Demonstrator’s Guide to Gas Masks and Goggles"
author: "CrimethInc."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-a-demonstrator-s-guide-to-gas-masks-and-goggles"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Everything You Need to Know to Protect Your Eyes and Lungs from Gas and Projectiles"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "crimethinc-a-demonstrator-s-guide-to-gas-masks-and-goggles.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-a-demonstrator-s-guide-to-gas-masks-and-goggles.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Executive Summary          The No-Compromise Expensive Option ($260–340)          The Cheaper Full-Face Protection Option ($40–150)          The Cheaper and Modular Option ($75)          The Gambler’s Choice ($60)          Live Dangerously (Cheap)        Protect Your Lungs, Protect Your Eyes          Protect Your Lungs: Respirators          Fitting a Respirator          Filters          Replacing Filters          Cleaning and Storing          A Note on COVID-19          Visors and Lenses          Protecting Your Eyes          Ballistics          Visors One of the basic ways that police maintain violent control of our society is by interfering with our ability to breathe—and sometimes with our ability to see. Nowadays, regardless of whether you employ confrontational tactics, you could be exposed to tear gas or hit by a rubber bullet just by being is in the vicinity of a protest. By taking the proper precautions, we can mitigate the risks while continuing to show up for each other. This guide explores a wide range of options for protecting your eyes and lungs from chemical agents and projectiles, detailing the advantages and disadvantages of each, so you can pick out what’s best for you. This is the second in a series of guides exploring how demonstrators can protect themselves. The contributors have spent countless hours gathering experience, data, and anecdotes to prepare this series—including carrying out impact testing on various masks and goggles. We will be updating this document on an ongoing basis as more information comes in. If you can offer suggestions or corrections, please contact us. The previous installment in this series details how to choose a proper helmet. The best respirator is the one you have access to. Respirators are good at what they do—filtering air—and most of them will serve you well enough in a pinch. If you don’t have time to read the entire text and you need to get some gear in a hurry, here are some options: If you want a new high-quality full-face mask that will work in the apocalypse, the MIRA CM-6M costs $220–240. The 7M is similar, but has a more “tactical” look. You can purchase this mask with two MIRA-brand CBRN cartridges for $50 each; otherwise, filters will cost $70 apiece. This is all you need. If you don’t want to use $100 worth of filters at a single demonstration, however, leave the CBRNs in their packaging at home (or skip buying them entirely) and get two expired-but-unopened CBRN filters for roughly $20 each via ebay.com. These should work for tear gas and pepper spray, but not for apocalypse-level threats. Each filter should work for approximately eight solid hours of full chemical exposure, which could mean 30–40 hours in the street during demonstrations that involve a lot of tear gas. You should change the filter as soon as you begin to smell gas leaking through. If you wear glasses, this mask is compatible with the 3M Safety 6878 Spectacle Kit designed for their 6800 mask. You will need to get prescription lenses for that. Civilian style full-face respirators such as the 3M brand 6800 ($150 with filters, using the same ones from the modular option below) offer protection for a much cheaper price. In our impact testing, we’ve also found that the JJKK and HAOX brand Chinese imports ($40, with filters) serve just as well to protect your eyes and offer an adequate seal against gas. If you want an affordable option that offers the best combination of ballistic resistance and chemical weapons protection, get a 3M half-mask respirator from the 6000 series for $25. The 6100 is the small, the 6200 is the medium, and the 6300 is the large. Attach a pair of 60926 cartridges ($35 for the pair). If the mask comes with 60921 or 60923 cartridges, you don’t need the 60926 cartridges. In addition, get a pair of Pyramex V2G Plus goggles for $15 and seal the vents on them with hot glue. If you wear glasses, get the RX insert and prescription lenses. The biggest downside of pairing a half-…
