---
title: "Anti-Ulises"
author: "Ramor Ryan"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ramor-ryan-anti-ulises-a-day-in-the-life-of-a-simmering-city"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Day In the Life of a Simmering City"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ramor-ryan-anti-ulises-a-day-in-the-life-of-a-simmering-city.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ramor-ryan-anti-ulises-a-day-in-the-life-of-a-simmering-city.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The March of the Umbrellas        A Cantina Full of Anarchists        Of Police and Streets        A Oaxaca Commune “History is a nightmare from which I am trying to wake.” Stephen Daedalus, in Ulysses, James Joyce 1922 Midnight in Oaxaca, and walking around the historic center, its almost as if nothing had ever happened here. The bourgeoisie sit around under the colonial arches in the long stretch of French-style outdoor cafes lining the central plaza. Aside from being beset by a small army of ambulant trinket vendors and beggars, the well-heeled citizens sipping cappuccinos seem very at ease with the world. A few late night tourists wander about the pleasant old streets under the starry sky, and the industrious hum of the sultry cosmopolitan city invokes an eternal calm. It’s as if there had never been a riotous peoples’ insurrection in these same streets just 2 years ago. As if the rebel citizenry had never erected one thousand and one barricades to defend their city from the marauding police forces of the despised and despotic state government. And as if the tens of thousands of rebels and insurrectionists had not been this close to winning the great battle for Oaxaca in the heady summer days and nights at the barricades of 2006. The famous subversive graffiti that painted the whole town red and black is removed, whitewashed, as is the blood in the streets of the 26 fallen comrades shot down by the police and state paramilitaries. “Since all of this, we will not be the same at all as before; we can’t be and we don’t want to be.” said a resident shortly after the quelled uprising. But at this moment, to a visitor just having stepped off the bus from Chiapas, the strange normality of the place gives the appearance that everything has not changed, that everything remains the same as pre-2006. Sometimes hope comes from the most unexpected quarters. Walking away from the sanitized Zocalo we chance upon a moribund vista. Shuffling around in the half shadows of a street corner, about a hundred tooled-up riot cops loiter with menace – as if itching for something to happen. The phalanx of troops, an ominous dark mass of helmets, riot shields and shiny black boots, clank their long metal sticks on the somewhat medieval flagstones. It is an incongruous sight at this time of night, amidst this placid ambiance, without the slightest disturbance to be ascertained of any kind anywhere. Paradoxically, their presence signifies a welcome sign – where there are riot police there is generally trouble, and trouble in the Oaxaca context, means… resistance. I have followed the movements of police riot squads with close interest for many years. So I approach the last cop in the line – a young indigenous man clad in state-of-the-art modern armor – with all the sweet innocence of a visiting tourist, and ask him as to why there are here. Is there a problem, officer? He tenses up, grips his metal baton and stares at the distant wall, not at me. “We are here for your protection” he says sternly – and somewhat comically. We have heard that one before. Back in the day, during the war in Ireland, this is how the occupying British troops behaved – nervous, uncertain and trigger-happy. So this is it – as people had forewarned – this tremulous peace in the city is one overseen by riot cops lingering in the shadows. Like Oaxaca is a city under stealthy occupation. Around midday, under the glare of the blazing tropical sun, some 50,000 protesting teachers start flooding into downtown Oaxaca. Today, May 15 is Teachers Day, and the states educators have downed chalk on-mass, and declared a strike as they have done religiously every year for the last 25 years. It’s a remarkable sight, the arrival of the teacher hordes. Teachers anywhere in the world are a most innocuous bunch of people, and the members of this particular branch of the national teachers union, known as Section 22, are the most unlikely street revolutionaries imaginable. Yet these same humb…
