---
title: "Anarchy in the USA"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-anarchy-in-the-usa"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The International Working People’s Association"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarcho-anarchy-in-the-usa.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-anarchy-in-the-usa.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Real Splits in the International        “The Chicago Idea”        Anarchists, Socialists, Marxists?          Was the IWPA “Revolutionary Socialist” rather than Anarchist?          Was the IWPA Marxist rather than Anarchist?          Was the IWPA a “synthesis” of Anarchism and Marxism?        Conclusions This article originally appeared in Black Flag Anarchist Review Volume 3, Number 2 (Summer 2023). It discussed the politics of the Chicago Martyrs and shows its links with the ideas of revolutionary anarchism expounded by Bakunin and Kropotkin. It also debunks attempts to portray them as Marxists when, in reality, they were Marxists who moved to anarchism. In her report to the International Anarchist Conference held in Amsterdam in 1907, Emma Goldman noted that the Pittsburgh Congress of October 1883 saw the “beginning of Anarchism, as a distinct and independent movement in America”. [1] It was here that the International Working People’s Association (IWPA) was formed and which grew in strength until the police riot of 4th May 1886 and the resulting Red Scare which saw eight anarchists tried for conspiracy with five losing their lives as a result of class justice. We will not discuss the events in early May in Chicago nor their legacy in the shape of International Workers’ Day here – they are too well-known. [2] Here we will concentrate on attempts by various writers to portray the Chicago Anarchists as something other than what they were, namely anarchist militants. As will become clear, these attempts – when not malicious – are the product of an ignorance of anarchist ideas and history. Needless to say, this does not absolve these historians as it is surely part of their job description to understand the theoretical and historical contexts of the individuals and movements they are commenting upon. Debunking these claims will mean recounting events in the International and the conflict between Bakunin and Marx as well as explaining basic aspects of anarchism and Marxism. This is unavoidable as the accounts which proclaim the non-anarchist nature of the IWPA fail to define anarchism and fail to provide relevant context in terms of Marxism. Once this is done, the obvious becomes clear – the Chicago Martyrs were the anarchists both they and the authorities thought they were. The origins of many of the misconceptions flow from a misunderstanding of the International and the role played by Marx and Bakunin within it. Far too often, commentators follow Marxist mythology on the matter so it is useful to note that Marx was not a “founder” of the International for he played no part in the discussions which lead to its initial meeting in 1864. That honour rests with British and French trade unionists. Marx, indeed, attended the founding Congress but did not speak. This is not to deny the important role he played in the organisation, the writing of its Rules and Inaugural Address (an address, incidentally, not given at the meeting but written weeks afterwards), and so forth. However, this early work was useful precisely because it did not reflect Marx’s own political ideology (beyond a few vague comments in the Inaugural Address). He initially stressed that the International was open to all currents within the labour and socialist movements – understandably, for it to be Marxist would have meant expelling the very people who created it. Within the International, different tendencies could raise their ideas and try to secure wider support. [3] Initially, the topics discussed at its Congresses reflected the ideas of the French mutualists who had helped found it but within its ranks arose what can only be described as a syndicalist current which stressed the role of trades unions as a means of both resisting and replacing capitalism and the State. When Bakunin joined the International in 1868, he championed these ideas and correctly predicted that electioneering would produce reformism. [4] As he put it: That the oppression and e…
