---
title: "All Our Lives"
author: "Carol Mazer, Lisa Berger"
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lisa-berger-and-carol-mazer-all-our-lives"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "English translation of De Toda la Vida"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lisa-berger-and-carol-mazer-all-our-lives.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lisa-berger-and-carol-mazer-all-our-lives.epub"
    hosted: false
---

         Mujeres Libres’ Anthem (Originally in Spanish) English Transcript Teresina: Back then wearing trousers was a very odd thing. I remember I wore my hair short like a boy. And as I never wore earrings, because I didn’t like them, when we went around to the villages people would look at me and say: “A woman in trousers!” And someone else would say, “No, it’s a boy!” But then they’d notice my breasts and say, “No, it is a girl!” Well, we used to joke a lot about that. But the fact is that my parents kicked me out of the house for wearing trousers. Narration #1: At the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, a large segment of the working class collectivized industries and agriculture on a wide scale. These women participated in that experiment, which a few years later, was to be buried under Franco’s military dictatorship and the war in Europe. Their stories form part of the history of the Spanish anarchist movement, who, on their own, tried to improve the human condition. Narration #2: Dolores Prat lives in Toulouse, France. She was born in a small village near Ripoll, Gerona, in Spain. Dolores: When I was little, my mother was ill much of the time. Although she prayed to the virgin; she never regained her health. That’s when I saw that religion was a lie. One day, I remember it was Christmas, the day of the magi, the year my mother died, we went into town to go shopping. We passed by a square like this one. There were some huge balconies filled with toys--the best in all of Spain. I said to my mother, “Why do the Magi bring so much to the rich kids and nothing to us?” She said, “They can’t find us because we live in a granary.” I said, “How can that be? If they really come down from the sky, they should see us first. It’s not fair that I don’t even get a cardboard doll while they get so much.” It seems to me my mother should have told me the truth. But she was very devout and she couldn’t do it. I went to a parochial school, but was afraid of the nuns. After about a year or so my father gave me something to read. I held the paper upside down. My father, who was illiterate, said, “Don’t you know how to read?” “No.” “Don’t you go to school?” “No.” “Why not?” “Because I’m afraid the nuns will lock me up and beat me.” My father said, “If you had only told me. I could go to city hall and get you into the public school.” And he did. So the little I know, I learned in one year. Narration #3: By 1919, Catalunya was one of the few industrial regions of Spain. In Barcelona and numerous towns, textile mills and clothing factories provided work for many people, especially women. Lola: I began working as a dressmaker’s assistant, and they paid me fifteen cents a week. I went in at eight in the morning,-but never finished at a set time. Because there were days when we’d have to return to the workshop with these big wooden crates that were used to deliver the dresses to the senoras. The apprenticeship consisted of running errands. And you learned over long years and through suffering. You went in at eight in the morning and might finish at 8 or 9 at night. So I thought, I earn very little here, and it’s a difficult situation. So I started working as a seamstress with trousers, and I got one real a week. Dolores: There was a strike all over Catalunya in 1919. I first went to work around the time it was over, when I was 15. I was always a good administrator and never needed luxuries. The little money I had seemed to multiply in front of me; I’m not sure how. My father said, “Why don’t you become a teacher?” I said, “Me, a teacher? Around kids all day long? No!” So he said: “I could help you set up a vegetable stand...” “With all the poverty in Ripoll, I’d give it all away. It wouldn’t be worth it.” “Well, what do you want to do, you have to do something?” “I want to go to work in a factory so I can protest.” Narration #4: In the mills, the metal, building and printing trades, union activity had been growing. Government authorities and…
