---
title: "Anarchist Organisation"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/iain-mckay-anarcho-anarchist-organisation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Practice as Theory Actualised"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "iain-mckay-anarcho-anarchist-organisation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/iain-mckay-anarcho-anarchist-organisation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        The Ideological and Social Context          Locke: Justifying Subordinate Relations          Rousseau: Liberty cannot exist without Equality          Associationism: Fraternity does not stop at the workplace door        Anarchist Organisation: Laying the foundations        Anarchist Organisation: Principles and Practice        Libertarians against “Libertarianism” (or the dangers of ideology)        Conclusion “organisation, that is to say, association for a specific purpose and with the structure and means required to attain it, is a necessary aspect of social life. A man in isolation cannot even live the life of a beast... Having therefore to join with other humans... he must submit to the will of others (be enslaved) or subject others to his will (be in authority) or live with others in fraternal agreement in the interests of the greatest good of all (be an associate). Nobody can escape from this necessity.” – Errico Malatesta [1] Rather than being a peripheral concept, organisation is fundamentally a core aspect of any ideology as it is “the point where concepts lose their abstraction” and “are interwoven with the concrete practices sanctioned or condemned by an ideology”. [2] What organisational forms an ideology advocates say far more about its actual core values than the words it uses. George Woodcock proclaimed that “it seems evident that logically pure anarchism goes against its own nature when it attempts to create elaborate international or even national organisations, which need a measure of rigidity and centralisation to survive.” A syndicalist union, in contrast, needs “relatively stable organisations and succeeds in creating them precisely because it moves in a world that is only partly governed by anarchist ideals”. He reflected the opinions a large band of more hostile commentators on anarchism who inflict a fundamental irrationality on anarchists. If “pure” anarchism is against any form of organisation beyond its “natural unit” of the “loose and flexible affinity group” then few sensible people would embrace it for neither a rail network nor a hospital could be reliably run by such a unit. [3] However, if we accept that anarchists are no different from other social activists and so fundamentally rational and realistic people as Davide Turcato correctly argues [4] then we need to admit that anarchist theoreticians and activists would not be advocating an ideal that by “its own nature” precludes practical alternatives to the social ills they are protesting against. Theory needs to be reflected in practice and, as will be shown, anarchists have always addressed the need for social organisation. Anarchist thinkers and activists are not isolated individuals but rather very much part of their society and its popular movements, seeking to gain influence for the ideas they have produced to solve the problems of their society. They are embedded in the world they were seeking to transform, aware of the intellectual and social context in which they live and critically engaged with both. At the birth of anarchism the ideological context was liberalism (as personified by John Locke) and democracy (as personified by Jean-Jacques Rousseau). The social context was the failure of the French Revolution and the rise of industrial capitalism as well as the oppositional movements each produced: radical republicanism and the labour and socialist movements, respectively. Liberalism is usually associated with John Locke yet we cannot understand him if he has “modern liberal-democratic assumptions read into his political thought.” [5] His theory is not primarily concerned with defending liberty but rather property and the power that comes with it. Locke takes wage-labour (“ Master and Servant ”) as existing in his “state of nature”. Thus “a Master of a Family ” rules over others expressed by “all these subordinate relations of Wife , Children , Servants , and Slaves ” and with “a very distinct and different…
