---
title: "The Authority of the Boot-Maker"
author: "Mal Content"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mal-content-the-authority-of-the-boot-maker"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Why I am an Anarchist"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mal-content-the-authority-of-the-boot-maker.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mal-content-the-authority-of-the-boot-maker.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     About the author      1. Content warning.      2. Introduction.      3. A word about terminology.      4. Awakening.      5. Anarchy and human nature.      6. The Nation-State: holding the lid on Class War.      7. Freedom, equality, and the law.      8. Money: power from debt.      9. Private property: ‘The subsidy of history’.      10. Capitalism and wage labour: the theft of life.      11. Marxism-Leninism: how not to abolish capitalism and the state.      12. Appendix: Some thoughts on historical materialism.      13. Mutual aid versus the sick society.      14. The ideological hegemony of the bourgeoisie.      15. Victim-blaming, system justification and the ‘just world’ fallacy.      16. Religion: Russell’s teapot.      17. Racism and the Working Class.      18. Privilege (for the benefit of the privileged), identity and the Class War.      19. Fascism and antifascism. Part one. Bourgeois fascism: pre-emptive counter-revolution.      20. Fascism and antifascism. Part two. Spain: Working Class antifascism versus Stalin’s counter-revolution.      21. Fascism and antifascism. Part three. Populist fascism: perpetual counter-revolution.      22. Patriarchy: A design for oppression.      23. The fear of violence.      24. The state is prison.      25. The Iva Valley Colliers.      26. Britain’s gulags.      27. Extremism.      28. Surveillance and compliance.      29. Police and Law enforcement.      30. Stefan Kiszko.      31. Direct Action: the education of revolutionaries.      32. Prefiguration: ‘Building the new world in the shell of the old’.      33. Direct democracy and consensus.      34. Demand-led production.      35. Reformist and reactionary tendencies in Class Struggle.      36. Mikhail Bakunin and antisemitism.      37. “It’ll never happen.” For my dad, who once said: “You give anarchists a bad name!” This book is made entirely from recycled surplus-value the bourgeoisie carelessly left lying about. Mal Content has got a job and doesn’t need a wash or a haircut, thanks, but the world does owe him a living. “Does it follow that I reject all authority? Far from me such a thought. In the matter of boots, I defer to the authority of the boot-maker; concerning houses, canals, or railroads, I consult that of the architect or the engineer. For such or such special knowledge I apply to such or such a savant. But I allow neither the boot-maker nor the architect nor the savant to impose his authority upon me. I listen to them freely and with all the respect merited by their intelligence, their character, their knowledge, reserving always my incontestable right of criticism and censure. I do not content myself with consulting a single authority in any special branch; I consult several; I compare their opinions, and choose that which seems to me the soundest. But I recognise no infallible authority, even in special questions; consequently, whatever respect I may have for the honesty and the sincerity of such or such an individual, I have no absolute faith in any person. Such a faith would be fatal to my reason, to my liberty, and even to the success of my undertakings; it would immediately transform me into a stupid slave, an instrument of the will and interests of others.” — Mikhail Bakunin, God and the State The material herein is distributed on Woody Guthrie terms [1] and may be reproduced without limit. Attribution is appreciated, but if you’re determined to pass it off as your own work Mal would only take that as a compliment. Anti-copyright Mal Content 2014, all wrongs reversed. As I’m in the business of setting the world to rights, it’s been necessary to refer to just about every way in which humans are habitually miserable to each other, and hopefully the chapter headings will give the reader a fair idea of what to expect. I’ve tried not to be gratuitous or graphic but if something especially nasty is coming up you may see this: (C.W.) I’m truly sorry the world is such a fucking awful place, we’re working on it…
