---
title: "Fear and Favor"
author: "Malaginoo"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/malaginoo-fear-and-favor"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Freedom of the Press in the Archipelago"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "malaginoo-fear-and-favor.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/malaginoo-fear-and-favor.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The History of Press Freedom        Journalism was Never Free        Without Fear or Favor Today On May 3, the world observes the World Press Freedom Day, a day set aside by the United Nations to commemorate the valiant duties and efforts of the press. On this day, we reflect the role of journalism in our lives, and remember the journalists who are persecuted and killed for reporting the truth for the world to know. We are called to stand for “Journalism Without Fear or Favor” something that has been lacking in our country, especially under our current government. We have seen since the advent of the regime under President Rodrigo Duterte that now more than ever, the freedom of the press in our country is continually violated by the State. Journalists continue to be attacked online, intimidate, and illegally arrested for being critical of the government. [1] They are degraded through the words of a President and his sycophants. [2] They are forced to recant and censor themselves for criticizing the multiple wrongs of the State. [3] They are simply banned from entering press briefings for asking questions too tough for a spokesperson to bear. [4] All of this while media outlets that offer a view counter to the narrative of the regime are threatened and prosecuted by partisans of administration. [5] What is worse is that the regime has already taken steps to completely legalize criminalizing dissent with the passage of the “Anti-Terrorism Bill” with provisions so vague that alternative news organizations and their journalists can be red-tagged and marked as terrorists to be put in jail indefinitely. [6] Meanwhile, false information masquerading as news continues to be spread on the internet, largely through accounts and pages supporting the regime of the President. [7] News items calling opposition figures “destabilizers,” “communists,” and “traitors” are shared and reposted, tricking people into believing falsehoods and influencing them to supporting whoever sponsored the disinformation campaign. [8] However, this problem did not begin with the current administration. Not in 2009, not in 1972, not even in 1896. In fact, for as long as journalism has been around, news has never been without fear or favor. Press freedom in the Philippines has always been under threat of censorship. Before the Philippines was even independent, the freedom of journalists, such as propagandists were stifled. Whether it be under the Spanish or the Americans, periodicals remained tightly controlled by the government, only allowing works that are neutral or outright supportive of the ruling class of colonialists. [9] After 1946, the press—though nominally independent—was under the influence of capitalists and politicians, such as the Lopezes of ABS-CBN. However, the next violent wave of violations against press freedom came under the rule of Ferdinand Marcos. Under that regime, all media outlets, newspaper, radio, television, were taken over and controlled by the government. All information was tightly controlled and censored, and those who refused to relent were “undermining the integrity of the government” and summarily arrested. [10] Even after the fall of Marcos, the press was still under threat from both inside and outside government. Under the succeeding administration, over 40 journalists were killed from 1987 to 2001. [11] The most cases, however, happened under government of President Arroyo where over 80 media workers were killed. Worse, under Arroyo the attitude of the government towards the press chilled with battles in court against periodicals and illegal actions against journalists of the time. [12] In 2009, the greatest attack on the press came with the Maguindanao Massacre where 58 people were slain—32 of which were journalists—by forces under the Ampatuan clan while part of Esmael Mangudadatu’s convoy. Only 30 of the 155 accused were convicted. [13] The problem with journalism is not exclusive to the Philippines, though it is c…
