---
title: "About the war with Ukraine"
author: "Vladimir Platonenko"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vladimir-platonenko-about-the-war-with-ukraine"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published by Avtonom. Written by Vladimir Platonenko. Translated by Riot Turtle with support from translation tools. Retrieved on 14th March 2022 from enoughisenough14.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "vladimir-platonenko-about-the-war-with-ukraine.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vladimir-platonenko-about-the-war-with-ukraine.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1        2        3        4 I am writing this after my I have lost my old Internet contacts and new ones have just been created, and I don’t know how many people will read it. Nevertheless, I want to express my opinion on the new phase of the Russian-Ukrainian war that began in February and what I believe people in the warring countries should do under these conditions. I do not believe that “the worst republic is better than any monarchy”. Everything is determined by grassroots activism of the masses, not by voting in elections. But in this case, the Ukrainian people are much more independent of the government and much more influenced by it than the Russian people. Putin considers this to be Ukraine’s weakness, but in fact it is its strength. This is the main reason why the army of the “full-fledged state” cannot cope with the army and self-defense units of Ukraine: slaves fight badly, while free people who do not want to be slaves fight well. This is one of the main reasons why Zelensky is perceived as a lesser evil even by his opponents in Ukraine. A lesser evil tends to transform into a bigger one, which makes it unreasonable to support a lesser evil. However, in addition to the Ukrainian Armed Forces, there are territorial defense units in Ukraine, and the Ukrainian government is forced to support them. Willingly or unwillingly, it has distributed weapons to the people. And now there is a third force in Ukraine – the armed people. In addition, as once in republican Spain, units of foreign volunteers are coming to Ukraine. Finally, partisan militias may emerge in the occupied territories. One should not idealize all this, the Ku Klux Klan was also a product of self-organization of a part of the people; but an armed self-organized population is the only force from which something good can emerge. Everything will depend on self-consciousness–the people’s self-defense units as a whole are just as “good” or “bad” as the people as a whole. That said, they are heterogeneous, as are the people as a whole. Anyway, as of today they are the only force worthy to be supported. And if I were asked where an ordinary Ukrainian, who doesn’t want to sit idly by, should go, I would answer: “If he or she can, create one’ own unit, if not – join the self-defense brigades. Or join a partisan unit.” The Ukrainian government is now forced to support this force. However, when the situation changes, it will try to get rid of the Territorial Defense units, the volunteers, and any other self-organized brigades. Recall the fate of the Donbass battalion, which was deliberately left without support and in a knowingly doomed position. Fighters of self-organized units should keep this in mind. It is more difficult for the inhabitants of the Russian Federation: all grass-roots initiatives are crushed here, and apart from street protests, which are also brutally crushed, the Russians can only offer passive resistance to the war: avoiding recruitment, desertion, voluntary surrender. In the future, even rebellions by soldiers may become possible, but for now, their prospects are doubtful. Although I have received information about mass refusals of contract soldiers to go to war with Ukraine, but I do not know how accurate this information is. If I am asked whether I should switch sides if I have the chance, I will answer: “Only to independent units. I can perfectly understand those who would like to join AFU (Ukranian army, translator ) , but I consider this to be a mistake. Mass strikes and refusal to pay taxes would be great resistance against the war, but I do not think that with the current level of self-organization that is possible in the Russian Federation. However, in the future I do not rule out social uprisings caused by the problems that the war will bring and has already begun to bring to Russians. In the latter case, along with the usual social demands, protesters should demand an immediate end to the war. This demand will naturally be s…
