---
title: "Catalonia: “It is Not Just a Question of Redrawing a Border”"
author: "Jose Antonio Gutiérrez Danton"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-catalonia-it-is-not-just-a-question-of-redrawing-a-border"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Interview with Miguel Pérez, Secretary of External Relations of CNT (Spain)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-catalonia-it-is-not-just-a-question-of-redrawing-a-border.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-catalonia-it-is-not-just-a-question-of-redrawing-a-border.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In the middle of a hectic week of the crisis between the central government in Madrid and the Catalan government, Anarkismo spoke with the Foreign Secretary of the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT), Miguel Pérez. In this interview, he discusses the position that has been maintained by the anarcho-syndicalist organization in Catalonia and the scenarios that the current situation opens for the class, libertarian and revolutionary sectors, throughout the Spanish state. “It is not just a question of redrawing a border, but of reformulating the structures and state system.” 1. What characterization do you, as CNT, have of the crisis in Catalonia and the Spanish state? What is really at stake? At CNT we are not mistaken about the origin of the current situation. Obviously, it responds to a conflict between elites to ensure their survival and ensure control of the territory for their own benefit. However the development of the situation, with the massive mobilization of a large part of the population in Catalonia, opens a series of social and economic intervention spaces that weren’t there a year ago, or at least not in the same way. The case of the Catalan government is very clear. The Generalitat (Catalan local government) has been largely controlled for 40 years by moderate right-wing nationalist parties. As a result of the economic crisis in the last years, its management has been heavily criticized, especially since the 15M eruption in 2011. The cuts to social services, corruption scandals, the unstoppable increase in debt, indignation about the repression against popular mobilizations … everything seemed to be against the Generalitat. Precisely from that moment on, the most questioned politicians pulled the independence card, initiating a process that leads to the current situation. That is not to say that there was not an important section of independence in Catalan society before, but the political maneuver is evident. For its part, in the case of the central government, it is the representative of a model of state and society that arose after the death of Franco, a process known as Transition. Since 1978, when the current constitution came into effect, the state has been based on a series of principles, such as monarchy, largely bipartisan parliamentary democracy, union representation through elections, unity of Spain with limited self-government for the regions , etc. Anyone who opposed any of these principles was immediately confronted with state apparatuses. This has been the case with the CNT, we have always refused (and we still refuse) to accept the current union model, based on majority unions pacts that function as control valves for the discontent of working people. This “regime of 78” has also been widely questioned since 2011, for reasons similar to those in the Catalan case. In fact, it is worth remembering that some of the politicians at the head of the independence process have been and are the local representatives of the very same regime in Catalonia. Therefore, it is possible to speak of a confrontation between elites, political, economic and unions, concerned with safeguarding their control of a certain territory. The challenge to the unity of Spain, launched by the Catalan independence initiative, is only one of the most evident factors in this questioning of the regime. But there are also other elements. It is not just that a considerable part of the population in Catalonia wants to be independent, but they want to be part of this state model. Iin many cases it is not just a question of redrawing a border, but of reformulating the structures and state system. As a Catalan colleague told me recently, “let’s not fool ourselves, we are at the threshold of a second transition”. That is a process that will fundamentally alter the structures of the whole Spanish state. For example, the Madrid government is already talking about reforming the constitution, etc. Of course, the purpose of these reforms and …
