---
title: "Anti-War Manifesto"
author: "Saul Yanovsky, Lillian G. Woolf, G. Vignati, P. Vallina, C. Trombetti, Nicolaas Jacob Cornelis Schermerhorn, William Shatoff, A. Savioli, I. Rochtchine, Gerhard Rijnders, E. Recchioni, Noel Panavich, H. Marques, J. Lemaire, Harry Kelly, Thomas Keell, Hippolyte Havel, V. Garcia, Carlo Frigerio, F.W. Dunn, Nestor Ciele van Diepen, Henrry Combes, Joseph J. Cohen, A. Calzitta, E. Boudot, A. Bernardo, George Barrett, G. Bernard, L. Bersani, Luigi Bertoni, Leonard D. Abbott, Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis, Emma Goldman, Alexander Berkman, Alexander Schapiro, Errico Malatesta"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-the-anarchist-international-and-war"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Note the opposing manifesto, The Manifesto of the Sixteen Chapter entitled “Malatesta, The Anarchist International, and War,” pages 387–390 of No Gods, No Masters edited by Daniel Guérin."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-the-anarchist-international-and-war.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-the-anarchist-international-and-war.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Europe in flames, tens of millions of men at loggerheads in the most frightful butchery in recorded history, hundreds of millions of women and children in tears, the economic, intellectual and moral life of seven great peoples brutally suspended, with the daily more grave threat of further military complications—such, five months on, is the dismal, harrowing, odious spectacle offered by the civilized world. But this spectacle was anticipated, by anarchists at any rate. For there never has been and is no doubt—and today’s horrific events reinforce this confidence—that war is permanently incubating within the existing body of society and that armed conflict, be it specific or general, in the colonies or in Europe, is the natural consequence and necessary, inescapable destiny of a regime founded upon the economic inequality of its citizens, relying upon the unbridled clash of interests, and placing the world of labor under the narrow, painful oversight of a minority of parasites who hold both political power and economic might. War was inevitable; from whatever quarter, it simply had to come. Not for nothing has the last half-century been spent on feverish preparation of the most formidable armaments and every passing day seen the death budgets swell. Continual refinement of war materials, every mind and every will kept constantly geared towards ever-better organization of the military machine—scarcely the way to work for peace. So it is naive and puerile, once the causes and the occasions of strife have been multiplied, to try to define the degree of blame attaching to such and such a government. No distinction is possible between offensive wars and defensive wars. In the current conflict, the governments in Berlin and Vienna have justified themselves by producing documents every bit as authentic as those produced by the governments in Paris, London and Petrograd. It is for whoever on each side who will produce the most unchallengeable, most telling documentation to prove their bona fides and portray themselves as the unblemished defender of the right and of freedom, the champion of civilization. Civilization? Who stands for that at the moment? Is it the German State with its redoubtable militarism, so powerful that it has stifled every vestige of rebellion? Or the Russian State, whose only methods of persuasion are the knout, the gibbet and Siberia? Or the French State with its Biribi, its bloody conquests in Tonkin, Madagascar, Morocco and forcible conscription of black troops; the France whose prisons have housed, for years past, comrades whose only crime was to have written and spoken out against war? Or England, as she exploits, divides, starves, and oppresses the peoples of her huge colonial empire? No. None of the belligerents has any right to lay claim to civilization, just as none of them is entitled to claim legitimate self-defense. The truth is that the root of wars, of the war currently bloodying the plains of Europe, just like all the ones that went before it, is located exclusively in the existence of the State, which is the political form of privilege. The State is born of military might; it has grown through recourse to military might, and, logically, it is upon military might that it must rely if it is to retain its omnipotence. Whatever the form it may assume, the State is merely oppression organized for the benefit of a privileged minority. The present conflict offers a striking illustration of this: all forms of the state are embroiled in the present war—absolutism is represented by Russia, absolutism mitigated by parliamentarism, by Germany, a State ruling over very different peoples, by Austria, constitutional democracy by England and the democratic republican system by France. The misfortune of the peoples, who were nevertheless all deeply committed to peace, is that they trusted in the State with its scheming diplomats, in democracy and in the political parties (even the opposition parties, like the parli…
