---
title: "Facerias"
author: "Alfredo M. Bonanno"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfredo-m-bonanno-facerias"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Introduction to biography"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alfredo-m-bonanno-facerias.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfredo-m-bonanno-facerias.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Facerias was one of those men that it almost comes naturally to write a biography about. All the essential elements of the legendary anarchist are to be found in his actions, his life as a whole and his death: the vindicator who rises up in struggle against the class enemy and refuses to accept any compromise. And this is certainly one way to read the volume we are presenting here, the first and, if you like, the least useful one. Many anarchists have struggled and are still struggling today with the same irreducible spirit of counter-position that characterised the life of Facerias or Sabate or the thousand other guerrilla fighters who fell while continuing the armed struggle against Francoism even after the fall of the Republic. And for many of them other books could have been written, dedicated not so much to a method or revolutionary position as to the will of the individual who insurges when everyone else keeps quiet fearfully awaiting signs of better days to come. Yet this first aspect of the question does not seem enough to me. Or rather, to tell the truth, it no longer seems to me to be enough. There was a time, twenty years ago, when what we could call the primary, essential analysis i.e. the analysis aimed at underlining the great courage of the actions and proposing them as examples to be followed seemed to me to be sufficient. I am now convinced that this preliminary aspect is no longer enough. One would run the of risk of falling into adulation. We need to say more today. Not so much about the responsibility of those who indirectly favoured repression by putting obstacles in the way of the revolutionary work of comrades such as Facerias in favour of political perspectives which defended the line of parties or the remainders of the conventicles of resistance; so much as concerning the very concept of antifascism and its retarding effect on the revolutionary struggle, and which was open to interpretation in a way that made it difficult to use clearly in an anarchist perspective of the destruction of power. The Spanish civil war and the inheritance that its tragedy left the European and world political left, certainly did not create the ideal atmosphere for clarifying such problems. Antifascism seemed, and continued to seem for decades to come, the common ground upon which to base revolutionary collaboration. The anarchist organisations which supported the activity of Facerias or Sabate abroad — because the problems were the same for these two comrades as for many others — also, and I would say essentially, had an antifascist perspective, one that was to give life to a counter-position capable of programming the return of the Republic to Spain. So they could support the actions of comrades who went into Spain to foment revolt, but they could not in any way support the actions of these comrades when they took place in situations such as those in France or Itay, where by definition fascism was not in power. Two kinds of problem derived from this strange concept of revolutionary struggle as intended by the institutional organisations of Spanish anarchism abroad and the considerable number of non Spanish organisations with positions similar to those of anarcho-syndicalism, both fraught with incomprehension and equivocation. In the first place the call for a generic collaboration in the name of anti-fascism, regardless of any proper analysis of the positions proposing intervention in the struggle. In fact, the positions of Facerias and Sabate were never object of serious examination, no discussion or debate ever took place. And Facerias himself never went beyond a generic desire to see all the groups that did not share the positions of the Spanish FAI or the CNT organised federatively . Secondly, the same generic and unclear agreement justified isolation and boycotting when their initiatives threatened to extend beyond Spanish fascism labelled as francoism, and strike any State structure, in that any State is an enemy for…
