---
title: "History of Anarchy I. (Excerpt)"
author: "Michael Schreiber, Georg Adler, Pëtr Kropotkin, Max Nettlau"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/max-nettlau-peter-kropotkin-georg-adler-michael-schreiber-history-of-anarchy-i-excerpt"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The early spring of anarchy — Its development from the beginning to 1864. According to Kropotkin, Prof. Max Nettlau and Prof. Georg Adler"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "max-nettlau-peter-kropotkin-georg-adler-michael-schreiber-history-of-anarchy-i-excerpt.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/max-nettlau-peter-kropotkin-georg-adler-michael-schreiber-history-of-anarchy-i-excerpt.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Peter Kropotkin, in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1910 (Short Excerpt) Anarchism The historical development of anarchism    Max Nettlau — History of Anarchy — Vol. I (Excerpt, Chapter I to Chapter III, translated into English by Michael Schreiber)      Chapter I: On the prehistory of freedom and authority      Chapter II: Zenon, the Stoics and Natural Law      Chapter III The first known political usage of the word anarchy (Ancient Greek: ἀναρχία) appeared in plays by Aeschylus and Sophocles in the fifth century BC. (in Oidipos — King of Thebes and in Seven against Thebes, both are playing in the 13 th century BC) Ancient Greece also saw the first Western instance of anarchy as a philosophical ideal mainly, but not only, by the Cynics and Stoics. The Cynics Diogenes of Sinope and Crates of Thebes are both supposed to have advocated for anarchistic forms of society, although little remains of their writings. Their most significant contribution was the radical approach of nomos (law) and physis (nature). Contrary to the rest of Greek philosophy, aiming to blend nomos and physis in harmony, Cynics dismissed nomos (and in consequence: the authorities, hierarchies, establishments and moral code of polis) while promoting a way of life, based solely on physis. Zenon of Kition, the founder of Stoicism, who was much influenced by the Cynics, described his vision of an egalitarian utopian society around 300 BC. Zenon’s Republic advocates a form of anarchic society where there is no need for state structures. He argued that although the necessary instinct of self-preservation leads humans to egotism, nature has supplied a corrective to it by providing man with another instinct, namely sociability. Like many modern anarchists, he believed that if people follow their instincts, they will have no need of law courts or police, no temples and no public worship, and use no money—free gifts taking the place of monetary exchanges. Sokrates expressed some views appropriate to anarchism. He constantly questioned authority and at the centre of his philosophy stood every man’s right to freedom of consciousness. Aristippus, a pupil of Socrates and founder of the Hedonistic school, claimed that he did not wish either to rule or be ruled. He saw the State as a danger to personal autonomy. Not all ancient Greeks had anarchic tendencies. Other philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle used the term anarchy negatively in association with democracy which they mistrusted as inherently vulnerable and prone to deteriorate into tyranny. The first forerunners of anarchism in Europe can be found in ancient Greek philosophy. The anarchist historian Prof. Max Nettlau sees the mere existence of the word “An-Archia” as evidence that “there were people who consciously rejected the rule, the state.” An outspoken critic of the state was Aristippus of Cyrene (approx. 435–355 BC), who represented an early form of hedonism and was the founder of Cyrenaism. From the standpoint of the greatest possible individual freedom, he preached that man should withdraw from state life. Aristippus also rejected the idea of ​​a fatherland and advocated cosmopolitan ideas. When asked whether he would rather belong to the ruling or ruled class in the state, Aristippus of Cyrene is said to have replied: “Neither of the two!” From the 5 th century BC, Diogenes of Sinope (approx. 400–324 BC) preached the return to a natural life. He and the students of the school of the Cynics, which he founded, saw the original needlessness as a desirable state. According to the Cynics, social harmony would prevail instead of mutual struggle and social conflict, since these arise from man’s greed for material possessions and the pursuit of honor. The historian Georg Adler sees the ideas of anarchism developed for the first time in world history in the teachings of Zenon of Kition (approx. 333–262 BC). Zenon, the founder of the Stoa, was a great critic of Plato’s ideal of a society that should find a mor…
