---
title: "Anarchism in China"
author: "David Pong"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/david-pong-anarchism-in-china"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "“Anarchism.” In Encyclopedia of Modern China, edited by David Pong, 28–30. Vol. 1. Detroit, MI: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 2009. Gale eBooks (accessed June 22, 2021)."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "david-pong-anarchism-in-china.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/david-pong-anarchism-in-china.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Early Anarchism in China, 1905–1910        Liu Shifu, the Epitome of Chinese Anarchism        High Tide at May Fourth, Decline During the 1920s        Bibliography China’s defeat in the Sino-Japanese War in 1894–1895 was a crowning blow after repeated humiliations in earlier decades of the nineteenth century. Even more important to many intellectuals were problems of injustice and corruption in China’s social and political order. Anarchism offered a systematic analysis of and response to all such problems, and Chinese intellectuals who adopted anarchist principles did so for some combination of this broad range of concerns. Two major forms of anarchism developed in China, both originating in European intellectual life of the previous several decades. The earliest notions about anarchism came by way of Japan and drew on revolutionary activism elsewhere, especially on Russian populism, which emphasized assassination and other forms of “propaganda by the deed.” A number of assassination attempts occurred in China during the first decade of the twentieth century. Early Chinese anarchists in Japan emphasized traditional thought and values. The activist couple Liu Shipei and his wife He Zhen gave shape to the anarchist ideas of the group that formed in Tokyo. Liu posited an anarchist society based on natural communities in the Chinese countryside, while He Zhen became the first to expound anarchist feminism in China. Liu and He presented their views in Tianyi bao (Heaven’s justice) and Heng bao (Natural equality). Personal and political considerations made the anarchist careers of this radical couple brief. The second model for anarchism emphasized the rationality of science and natural law. This anarchism influenced Chinese who sojourned in Europe, especially in France, in the early 1900s. The Chinese anarchist group that formed in Paris developed an avant-garde, science-oriented form of anarchism. Their greatest inspiration was Peter Kropotkin, the great Russian anarchist leader who had abandoned violence in favor of sophisticated theory and popular organizing. His anarchism rested on observation of history and society, and he emphasized the concept of mutual aid ( huzhu ), which became a watchword for Chinese activists of all viewpoints by the late 1910s. The Paris group criticized superstition and backward social customs. They urged the application of modern science in every aspect of life, thus launching a major theme among subsequent generations of intellectuals. Three individuals formed the nucleus of the Paris group: Zhang Jingjiang, Li Shizeng, and Wu Zhihui. Zhang managed his family’s business importing European goods to China. Li, who studied biology, started an enterprise to prepare bean curd ( doufu ) for sale. These activities launched the group on a practical footing and provided outlets for their evolving anarchist ideas. Wu joined them later and wrote eloquently in their anarchist journal Xin shiji (The new century). Begun in 1907, this journal emphasized the scientific basis of anarchism, ridiculed superstition in Chinese life, and challenged the Qing government’s authority. Liu Sifu (1884–1915), who adopted the name Shifu in 1912, became China’s most consistent anarchist. Liu’s evolution as an anarchist reflects all the influences described above. He went to Japan to study in 1906 and joined the Tongmeng Hui (Revolutionary Alliance). Following a failed assassination attempt in May 1907, Liu studied the Paris group’s Xin shiji and other journals during three years in prison and completed his transition to theoretical anarchism. Essays written then also show Liu’s attraction to the Buddhist ideal of the self-sacrificing bodhisattva, which characterized his entire career. After the Republic was established in early 1912, Shifu used only pacifist means to propagate anarchism. He organized family and friends into an anarchist commune in Guangzhou. The group launched Min sheng (Voice of the people), which comment…
