---
title: "Form-of-Life"
author: "Giorgio Agamben"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/giorgio-agamben-form-of-life"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Means without End"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "giorgio-agamben-form-of-life.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/giorgio-agamben-form-of-life.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The ancient Greeks did not have only one term to express what we mean by the word life. They used two semantically and morphologically distinct terms: zoé, which expressed the simple fact of living common to all living beings (animals, humans, or gods), and bios, which signified the form or manner of living peculiar to a single individual or group. In modern languages this opposition has gradually disappeared from the lexicon (and where it is retained, as in biology and zoology, it no longer indicates any substantial difference); one term only – the opacity of which increases in proportion to the sacralization of its referent – designates that naked presupposed common element that it is always possible to isolate in each of the numerous forms of life. By the term form-of-life, on the other hand, I mean a life that can never be separated from its form, a life in which it is never possible to isolate something such as naked life. A life that cannot be separated from its form is a life for which what is at stake in its way of living is living itself. What does this formulation mean? It defines a life – human life – in which the single ways, acts, and processes of living are never simply facts but always and above all possibilities of life, always and above all power (potenza). Each behavior and each form of human living is never prescribed by a specific biological vocation, nor is it assigned by whatever necessity; instead, no matter how customary, repeated, and socially compulsory, it always retains the character of a possibility; that is, it always puts at stake living itself. That is why human beings – as beings of power who can do or not do, succeed or fail, lose themselves or find themselves – are the only beings for whom happiness is always at stake in their living, the only beings whose lives are irremediably and painfully assigned to happiness. But this immediately constitutes the form-of-life as political life. "Civitatem... communitatem esse institutam propter vivere et bene vivere hominum in ea [The State is a community instituted for the sake of the living and the well living of men in it]." Political power (potere) as we know it, on the other hand, always founds itself – in the last instance – on the separation of a sphere of naked life from the context of the forms of life. In Roman law, vita (life) is not a juridical concept, but rather indicates the simple fact of living or a particular way of life. There is only one case in which the term life acquires a juridical meaning that transforms it into a veritable terminus technicus, and that is in the expression vitae necisque potestas, which designates the pater's power of life and death over the male son. J. Thomas has shown that, in this formula, que does not have disjunctive function and vita is nothing but a corollary of nex, the power to kill. Life, thus, originally appears in law only as the counterpart of a power that threatens death. But what is valid for the pater's right of life and death is even more valid for sovereign power (imperium), of which the former constitutes the originary cell. Thus, in the Hobbesian foundation of sovereignty, life in the state of nature is defined only by its being unconditionally exposed to a death threat (the limitless right of everybody over everything) and political life – that is, the life that unfolds under the protection of the Leviathan – is nothing but this very same life always exposed to a threat that now rests exclusively in the hands of the sovereign. The puissance absolue et perpetuelle, which defines State power, is not founded – in the last instance – on a political will but rather on naked life, which is kept safe and protected only to the degree to which it submits itself to the sovereign's (or the law's) right of life and death. (This is precisely the originary meaning of the adjective sacer [sacred] when used to refer to human life.) The state of exception, which is what the sovereign each and every time deci…
