---
title: "BEE-llionnaires in Mbeki-stan"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-bee-llionnaires-in-mbeki-stan"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "BEE debate shows nature of post-apartheid SA, and limits of ‘left’ critique"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-bee-llionnaires-in-mbeki-stan.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-bee-llionnaires-in-mbeki-stan.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       APARTHEID AND CAPITALISM        “FRESH FIELDS FOR NON-EUROPEAN BOURGEOIS”        TO BEE OR NOT TO BEE        RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT        AT THE PARTY        AGAINST CAPITALISM Recent debates in the press around the issue of “Black Economic Empowerment,” or BEE, bring key features of the post-apartheid dispensation into stark relief. They also show the limits of much of what is considered to be “progressive” or left-wing politics in South Africa. BEE is about creating an elite of Black capitalists, something that underlines the class agenda of the ANC. In the 1980s, the more radical layers of the anti-apartheid movement within South Africa believed that capitalism and apartheid were joined at the hip. Apartheid policies provided capitalism with a cheap, unfree, and racially structured working class; the capitalist profits that resulted, funded the development of a powerful and militarised local State. Many therefore thought that capitalism could not survive the abolition of apartheid. This view was too simplistic. Apartheid policies benefited low-wage and low-skill sectors like mining and farming, but they were not useful for advanced sections of the manufacturing sector that grew dramatically from the 1940s onwards. By 1995, mining was only 10% of overall economic activity, with agriculture at 4,5%; manufacturing was nearly 40% of the whole economy. Large manufacturing companies that relied on sophisticated machinery designed for mass production situations were constrained by the small local market and the under-skilled workforce. International pressures limited their ability to expand through exports. This meant a significant section of local capitalists were interested in a post-apartheid – and neoliberal – dispensation. Low wages would be guaranteed through the free market, rather than the heavy hand of the State. This type of view was expressed in books like The Assault on Free Enterprise: the Freeway to Communism , by A. D. Wassenaar, head of SANLAM. This shift converged with the pro-capitalist policies of the main national liberation movements. The ANC’s Freedom Charter of 1955 called for the nationalisation of major industries, but within a capitalist framework. Mandela made it clear in 1956 in Liberator the Charter aimed at opening up “ fresh fields for the development of a prosperous non-European bourgeois class ” that will for the “ first time… have the opportunity to own in their own name and right, mines and factories, and trade and private enterprise will boom and flourish as never before. ” It should be stressed that this statement was issued at the very same time as the ANC was forming an underground alliance with the SA Communist Party. The SACP did not object, as its strategic position stressed the need for a two-stage revolution in which a stage of “national democracy,” non-racial capitalism with a “non-European bourgeois class” must precede any socialist transformation. On the need for a “national democratic stage,” the ANC agreed – although it has no interest in a second stage. The two-stage strategy is common enough amongst Communist Parties in the so-called “Third World,” and generally involved postponing the struggle against capitalism in favour of a struggle for “national” capitalism against a vague “imperialism” by multi-class nationalist parties. Generally it has been a disaster, leading the left to drop its own politics. In some cases, the left has paid in blood for this mistake. The ANC’s position was no passing viewpoint: as Oliver Tambo said in 1985: The Freedom Charter does not even purport to want to destroy the capitalist system. All that the Freedom Charter does is to envisage a mixed economy in which part of the economy, some of the industries would be controlled, owned by the state (as happens in many countries), and the rest by private ownership- a mixed economy. Today the ANC has even dropped the “mixed economy,” for neo-liberal “free markets.” The negotiations of the 1990s finally op…
