---
title: "Against the War on Terrorism"
author: "Peter Gelderloos"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-against-the-war-on-terrorism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "ZNet, 19 May 2009 P. Gelderloos, personal communication, August 9, 2009"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-gelderloos-against-the-war-on-terrorism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-against-the-war-on-terrorism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

It surprised me, a little bit, to notice the other day on wikileaks, a website that anonymously publishes classified government documents, that my name is mentioned in the recent Virginia Terrorism Threat Assessment. Under the heading “Anarchist Extremists,” I am singularly identified as an anarchist of note. We “anarchist extremists” make the top of the list for Virginia’s domestic terrorism threats, well above white supremacist groups that have actually killed people. Polluting factories, weapons companies, negligent employers, the nuclear power plant, the prison guards union — none of these even make the list, although they too are responsible for death counts infinitely higher than the state’s meek anarchists, who content themselves with writing, protesting, organizing social centers, distributing free food, and perhaps occasionally sabotaging property of corporate and governmental targets. The information reported in the section on anarchists reveals that, on the one hand, security experts in Virginia are collecting information on people like myself in over a dozen counties across the state, and on the other hand, these security experts are blundering idiots who haven’t the slightest clue about anarchist theory and practice and cannot distinguish between real anarchist organizations that have been active for years and ironic fake names signed to humorous communiques and pamphlets. I have no doubt that my name is the only one cited in the Terrorism Threat Assessment section on anarchists because I am the only Virginia anarchist whose name comes up on a google search, since I’ve written a book or two and my name has been referenced in the media in relation to a couple trials. I also have no doubt as to what tactics the FBI and police consider fair to use against people they are assessing as terrorists. One of the few things that may limit their regularly exercised power to surveille, harass, frame, imprison, torture, and even kill is the extent to which good citizens go along with it or look the other way. Of course they have to be a bit more gentle with people like me — white and from the middle class — although recent years have shown that they have cowed American society enough that they can get away with locking up even such similarly privileged people for over 22 years for burning down a genetic research laboratory in a political action which harmed no one. Burning down a laboratory is illegal, but the fact of the matter is that the government has left no legal means for stopping an industry for which no public mandate exists and which irrevocably changes all of our lives and the very future of our planet — genetic engineering. We were never consulted on this, nor on any of the other policies or economic developments that are changing — hell, let’s be honest, destroying — our lives. We certainly didn’t all vote to funnel a huge portion of our society’s wealth to the banks to bail out them out from a crisis they created at our expense, and the government gives us no legal means to punish the banks or take a little of that wealth back. Some people have a sycophantic respect for the law above all other ethical values, anarchists do not. This is why anarchists are currently a major focus of the government’s domestic War on Terror. And due to the fact that we respect human needs and the environment instead of respecting the law, it has become easy to prosecute us as terrorists, since the federal government changed the definition of terrorism to illegal activity intended to pressure or change government policy. Frankly, there was a popular mandate, engineered by the mass media, to fight a war against terrorism, because after September 11 th the majority of Americans were gullible enough to believe their government, forgetting for a tragic moment how many times they’ve gotten burned before. The government, of course, lost no time in sentimentality; the same day the Twin Towers came down, George W. Bush was calling it “an oppo…
