---
title: "Class"
author: "Alan MacSimoin"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alan-macsimoin-class"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Thinking about anarchism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alan-macsimoin-class.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alan-macsimoin-class.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       STOLEN WAGES        WHAT ABOUT THE UNEMPLOYED?        NONSENSE        TAKING OVER        POTENTIAL FOR CHANGE        THE WAY TO FREEDOM WHY IS THE concept of class so important to anarchists? Why are we constantly talking about classes and class struggle? Some of our opponents accuse us of living in the past, they claim the working class is dying out. After all you don’t see too many workers wandering around in donkey jackets, cloth caps and heavy boots. So that settles the question, doesn’t it? No, it doesn’t, so let us get away from silly caricatures and get down to basics. The modern world, like the societies that preceded it, does not consist of a single group of people who have more in common than they have dividing them. Sadly there is no single ‘humanity’, not yet. In every country there is still a division of people into classes which have conflicting interests. Classes are defined by their relationship to the means of production; their relationship to the factories, machinery, natural resources, etc. with which the wealth of society is created. Although there are groups such as the self-employed and the small farmers, the main classes are the workers and the bosses. It is the labour of the working class that creates the wealth. The bosses, through their ownership and control of the means of production, have legal ownership of this wealth and decide how it is to be distributed. Only a part of this wealth is returned. Some is paid as wages, some as the “social wage” (hospitals, schools, public services, and so on). The rest is creamed off as profit. But labour creates all wealth. An apple on a tree is worth nothing until someone picks it, coal in the ground has no use until someone mines it. What is known as surplus value or profit is stolen wages. The working class is the majority in Ireland today. All who work for a wage, salary or commission are in its ranks. It consists of all who have to sell their ability to work to those in control. It makes no difference if you work in a factory, office, school, hospital or shop. It makes no difference if you work with your hands or your brain, whether you wear overalls or a suit, whether you earn ‘good’ or bad wages. The unemployed also form part of the working class. Social welfare payments are made to those who have worked and those who may potentially provide some employer with their labour power. It is a condition of payment that a claimant is “available for and actively seeking work”. Needless to say, the partners and children of workers are also part of the same class, as are the retired. The interests of the working class (wages, working conditions, jobs, useful public spending, etc.) are in constant and inevitable conflict with those of the boss class. They seek to maximise their profits and gain an advantage over their competitors at the expense of the workers. Anyone who talks about ‘social partnership’, about labour and capital working together for the benefit of all is talking nonsense. What rights we have and gains we have made have been the result of long and often bitter struggles. The bosses only give such rights and concessions as they are forced to. In times of recession, such as now, they try to make workers pay through job losses, cuts in real wages, cuts in public spending, productivity deals, etc. for the crisis that is a periodic and inevitable product of capitalism. Although capitalism oppresses people on many different levels, race and sex to name but two; it is the exploitation of our labour that is fundamental to the system. It is on this front that the fight for a new society will be won or lost. If we can reclaim that aspect of our lives, the system can be overturned and replaced with something much better. The working class are brought together in large towns and cities. At work we co-operate with others. Each person has to do their bit so that the person at the next stage of production can do theirs. In the services it is the same; in hospi…
