---
title: "Disobedience and the New Pacifism"
author: "Nicolas Walter"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nicholas-walter-disobedience-and-the-new-pacifism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First published in Anarchy #014 Retrieved on 21st September 2020 from https://libcom.org/library/disobedience-new-pacifism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nicholas-walter-disobedience-and-the-new-pacifism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nicholas-walter-disobedience-and-the-new-pacifism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Theory of Insurrection        The Practice of Disobedience        Resistance to civil government Last month I examined the background of the unilateralist movement from the point of view of the theories of pacifism and anti-militarism and of the practices of non-violence and direct action, and suggested that the movement is a new pacifism which combines individual responsibility with collective resistance. Rather than recapitulate my argument, I will quote what Alex Comfort said just after the last war about the need for a new pacifism : The atomic bomb has brought home to increasing numbers of the public at large that tyranny is not a greater evil than war, because war itself is an instrument of tyranny on the largest scale ... Objection is not enough. The objector, particularly the religious objector, is politically irrelevant because he is chiefly interested in safeguarding his own conscientious objection to one aspect of state irresponsibility. You do not want objection, you want resistance, ready to adopt every means short of violence to destroy and render useless the whole mechanism of conscription. It is not enough to secure the immunity and support of religious believers and a politically conscious minority. The opposition of the ordinary man to military service must be canalised. He will not stand up against the machinery of governments and penalties, with the knowledge that his wife and children arc hostages, unless he has the consciousness of that powerful, if invisible, support which the European resistance movements gave to the unpolitical man in his opposition to the Germans. Men will defy conscription in defence of their own lives and homes against military adventurers // they know that there is someone to support them. They will act out of an intuitive and thoroughly unpatriotic love of freedom, the sentiment which makes conscription necessary in the first place. The answer to conscription, in England and in every country of the world, is a resistance movement which ask few political credentials of its members ... It is by taking the offensive that pacifism will become politically relevant. [1] This is where we came in. This month I want to examine the background of the unilateralist movement again, this time from the point of view of the theory of insurrection and of the practice of disobedience. Disobedience* against the State is a much older human tradition than direct action against war. Men are authoritarian, obsessed by obedience and inequality and slavery. “No two men can be half an hour together,” declared Samuel Johnson, “but one shall acquire an evident superiority over the other” — and he will do his best to keep it. But men are also libertarian, obsessed by disobedience and equality and liberty. The myths of Prometheus and Lucifer, of the revolt of the lesser against the greater, are among the oldest of all; Adam’s first action (even before he “knew” Eve) was to disobey his creator. Nor is mythological disobedience mere nihilism. Prometheus brought fire to earth, Lucifer brought light — Adam ate the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and he did not die, as God had threatened, but instead his eyes were opened. The State’s motto is Befehl ist Befehl. The individual’s motto is Nan serviam. “Wherever there is a man who exercises authority”, said Oscar Wilde, “there is a man who resists authority.” The Communist Manifesto (1848) stated that “the history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles” — of inequality being maintained by the haves and equality being claimed by the have-nots. But there are two confusing factors . One is that many have-nots accept inequality (here is the fact of “voluntary servitude”), and many haves reject it. Marx and Engels themselves were haves who turned their coats, and the same is true of most radical and revolutionary leaders; neither Prometheus nor Lucifer was a man — one was a Titan and the other was an Angel. The motive…
