---
title: "Cursory Strictures"
author: "William Godwin"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-godwin-cursory-strictures"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "On the Charge Delivered By Lord Chief Justice Eyre To The Grand Jury, October 2, 1794."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-godwin-cursory-strictures.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-godwin-cursory-strictures.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       APPENDIX, No. I.        APPENDIX, No. II. A Special Commission was opened on the second day of October, for the trial of certain persons apprehended upon suspicion of High Treason, the greater part of whom were taken into custody in the month of May 1794. Upon this occasion a charge was delivered to the Grand Jury, by Sir James Eyre, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. It is one of the first privileges of an Englishman, one of the first duties of a rational being, to discuss with perfect freedom, all principles proposed to be enforced upon general observance, when those principles are first disclosed, and before they have yet, by solemn and final proceeding, been made part of a regular established system. The Chief Justice, in his charge to the Jury, has delivered many new and extraordinary doctrines upon the subject of treason. These doctrines, now when they have been for the first time stated, it is fit we should examine. In that examination, I shall deliver my opinions in a manner perfectly frank and explicit. No man should seek to offend high authorities and elevated magistracy; but the object before us is of an importance paramount to these considerations. Decorum is an excellent thing; but we ought not to sacrifice to the fastidious refinements of decorum, all that is most firm in security, or most estimable in social institution. The Chief Justice has promised a publication of his charge, and I should have been glad to have waited for the opportunity of an authentic copy. But there are only a few days remaining, previous to the commencement of trials, of the highest expectation, and most unlimited importance. He who thinks, as I think, that the best principles of civil government, and all that our ancestors most affectionately loved, are struck at in the most flagrant manner in this charge, will feel that there is not an hour to be lost. While I animadvert upon its enormities, it is with some pleasure that I shall reflect upon the possibility of the enormities being aggravated or created by the imperfect and irregular form of the publication before me. Every friend of his country will participate the highest satisfaction, at finding them answered, by a regular publication of the charge to the Grand Jury, stripped of the illegal and destructive doctrines that now appear to pollute it. Among the various branches of the English Constitution that have for centuries been a topic of unbounded praise, there is none, that has been more, or more deservedly, applauded, than that which relates to the law of treason. “The crime of of high treason,” says Chief Justice Eyre, [1] “though the greatest crime against faith, duty, and human society, and though the public is deeply interested in every well founded prosecution of this kind, has yet, at the best times, been the object of considerable jealousy, in respect of the prosecutions instituted against it: they are State prosecutions.” It is therefore of the utmost consequence, that the crime of high treason should be clearly defined, and the exquisite jealousy allayed, which must otherwise arise in every benevolent mind. This has been done by the act 25 Edward III, one of the great palladiums of the English Constitution. This law has been sanctioned by the experience of more than four centuries; and, though it has been repeatedly attacked by the incroachments of tyrannical princes, and the decisions of profligate judges, Englishmen have always found it necessary in the sequel to strip it of mischievous appendages and artificial glosses, and restore it to its original simplicity and luster. By this law all treason, exclusively of a few articles of little general concern, is confined to the “levying war against the King within the realm, and the compassing or imagining the death of the King.” Nay, the wise framers of the law were not contented to stop here: they not only shut out the the mischief of arbitrary and constructive treason for themselves, but inserted a p…
