---
title: "Hatta Shūzō and Pure Anarchism in Interwar Japan"
author: "John Crump"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-crump-hatta-shuzo-and-pure-anarchism-in-interwar-japan"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-12-12 from https://libcom.org/history/hatta-sh%C5%ABz%C5%8D-pure-anarchism-interwar-japan-john-crump"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-crump-hatta-shuzo-and-pure-anarchism-in-interwar-japan.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-crump-hatta-shuzo-and-pure-anarchism-in-interwar-japan.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-crump-hatta-shuzo-and-pure-anarchism-in-interwar-japan)

4. Organisational Confrontation: Pure Anarchists versus Syndicalists 1926–31

This book is dedicated to Derek and Marjorie Crump, who taught me that no things are more important than mutual love, social justice, and decency in human relations.

In Europe my thanks are mainly due to friends and comrades whose interest in my research encouraged me to believe, even when the going was tough, that the project was worthwhile. I cannot mention them all by name, but it would be churlish to omit the following four. Adam Buick in London and Peter Nicholson in York were kind enough to comment on early chapters of my manuscript. I am grateful for their useful and informed criticisms. Alain Pengam in Paris read the entire manuscript and thus I benefited from his detailed knowledge of anarchist communism. Mark Shipway in Leeds also read the entire manuscript and his many helpful comments were unfailingly meticulous in their attention to detail and their communist content. I am pleased to be able to use this opportunity to pay tribute to Mark as an exemplary friend and comrade. Last, but not least, come the three women in my life. With good humour. Emily Midorikawa Crump and Erica Midorikawa Crump put up with their father’s strange enthusiasms for visiting obscure bookshops, for paying respect at the graves of fallen revolutionaries, and for interminable discussions on the minutiae of anarchist communism. Their only resistance as they traipsed behind me across the length and breadth of a very different Japan from that which features in the glossy brochures was to rename Hatta Shūzō ‘Hatta Shoesore’. Midorikawa Taeko helped me in more ways than she knows or I can record. Her just being there was no less important than her obvious role of checking my translations of the pure anarchists’ Japanese on the many occasions when they expressed themselves in language which was even more convoluted, polemical or jargon-ridden than usual. The best compliment I can pay to these women in my life is that, if ever we do achieve a society which is both anarchist and communist, it will be inhabited by people like them.

Japanese names are given in the customary East Asian form, i.e. family name (e.g. Hatta) followed by personal name (e.g. Shūzō). Long vowels in Japanese words are indicated by macrons (e.g. ō).

‘Pure anarchism’ was the dominant current within Japanese anarchism during the interwar years. Its adherents were anarchist communists who wished to rid anarchism of the ‘impurity’ of syndicalism. It might well be asked: why write a book on these pure anarchists? After all, did they not ultimately fail in their attempt to establish an anarchist communist society and are they not largely forgotten today even within Japan? Besides, was it not Spain where anarchism’s life-and-death struggle was fought in the 1930s? Why, then, should we in Europe pay much attention to what happened during roughly the same period in an East Asian country, far removed from the drama in Spain?

In reply, I can give at least three reasons why a study of Japanese pure anarchism is worthwhile. First, the image of the Japanese (including Japanese working men and women) which has prevailed in the West during recent decades has been of an overwhelmingly conformist and docile people. The oft-repeated epithet ‘economic animals’ has been used to describe the apparent character of the Japanese during much of the postwar period and has conveyed their seeming indifference to political principles or ethical questions. At an early stage of my research into pure anarchism I read a paper on ‘The Communist Idea in Japan’ at a seminar in Oxford, where I was criticised because I had supposedly overlooked the ‘fact’ that the Japanese are the most unrevolutionary, order-loving and conformist people in the world. Of course, this widely held image derives from attributing to all Japanese in all eras certain characteristics which, even if present today (and it is arguable that they are nowhere near as universal as is often claimed), are of very short historical duration. Not only does this image conflict with the perception of the Japanese as a revolutionary people, which was widespread throughout East Asia in the years following the upheaval of 1868, but it also clashes with the supposedly unJapanese concern for political principles and ideological clarity which was demonstrated by the pure anarchists of the interwar years. Hence one reason for writing a book on the pure anarchists is that I think it is instructive to draw the attention of Western readers to those ‘other Japanese’, those whose very existence (irrespective of their concrete achievement) modifies the negative image projected by their depressingly conformist countrymen and countrywomen.

A second reason for my interest in the pure anarchists is that they represent an authentically Japanese expression of the universal principles of communism. By communism I mean, of course, not the system of bureaucratic power, party domination, and state manipulation of the economy found in countries such as (until recently) Russia and China, but the project to reorganise society so as to achieve a community of social equals who would control the means of production communally, cooperatively organise production for the direct satisfaction of needs, and consume by taking freely from the commonly held wealth of society. Such a vision of social reorganisation got its first fully worked-out presentation in Japanese when Petr Kropotkin’s (1842–1921) The Conquest of Bread was translated in 1909. Although The Conquest of Bread struck a responsive chord among many radical Japanese of that era, it remained very much a Japanese translation of an essentially European work. The very title The Conquest of Bread (as opposed to The Conquest of Rice ) indicates the (for many Japanese) exotically European flavour of Kropotkin’s passionate arguments for communism. Kropotkin remained the dominant influence on the pure anarchists during the interwar years and this was reinforced when his Collected Works were published in Japanese from 1928. Nevertheless, by that period communism had been fully assimilated by its Japanese exponents, so that by then the pure anarchists were able to relate it thoroughly to Japanese society and present it to a Japanese audience in an authentically Japanese form. Thus, when the pure anarchists wrote texts of their own to popularise communism, the commune which they, like anarchist communists everywhere, advocated as the unit of communist society had ceased to be a European transplant from Kropotkin’s texts and was clearly a Japanese farming village, transformed by an anarchist revolution no doubt, but none the less Japanese for that. Likewise, those who were expected to bring about this social transformation were not cosmopolitan revolutionaries expressing European concepts in katakanaesque Japanese, but flesh and blood products of Japanese society, such as the tenant farmers.

Several years ago Maximilien Rubel and I edited a volume of essays under the title Non-Market Socialism in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries . [1] ‘Non-market socialism’ was a synonym for what I have referred to here as ‘communism’. Although in that earlier book we chose not to use the word ‘communism’ because of our concern that it might be misinterpreted as having a connection with the political systems formerly or actually found in Russia, China and elsewhere, there is no alternative to employing the term here, since ‘anarchist communism’ was the declared aim of the pure anarchists. Our theme in Non-Market Socialism in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries was that, although a communist society has so far never been achieved anywhere, communism has nevertheless had a constant, if unsteady, existence during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as a challenge to the ideology of capitalism. For as long as there has been industrial capitalism, groups of working men and women have reacted to its existence, and to the indignities and irrationalities which inevitably accompany it, by formulating a communist alternative. The book argued that neither social democracy nor bolshevism represented communist challenges to capitalism, since both were variations on the capitalist theme, in that they left intact the principal constituent elements of capitalism (the wages system, commodity production, state power and so on). The real challenge to capitalism has come from quarters other than social democracy or bolshevism, and the currents we examined as different versions of this communist challenge in the various chapters of our book were the following:

Anarchist communism, represented from approximately 1880 onwards by a string of thinkers and activists, such as Kropotkin and Alexander Berkman (1870–1936).

The impossibilism of currents such as the Socialist Party of Great Britain, which was founded in 1904 in the course of the split between ‘possibilists’ and ‘impossibilists’ in the ranks of the Social Democratic Federation in Britain.

The council communism associated with the German Revolution of 1918 and its aftermath, which was articulated by theoreticians such as Anton Pannekoek (1873–1960), Otto Ruhle (1874–1943) and Paul Mattick (1904–81).

Bordigism, which takes its name from Amadeo Bordiga (1889–1970), the first leader of the Communist Party of Italy, before the leadership of that party passed in 1924 to others more acceptable to the Comintern, such as Antonio Gramsci (1891–1937).

The situationism of the Situationist International, whose activity spanned the period 1957 to 1972 and was one of the streams feeding the upheaval in Paris in May 1968.

Considered in isolation, it is tempting to dismiss any one of these five currents as too weak to be of much significance. Taken together, however, they represent a sustained critique of capitalism and a consistently posed, communist alternative to it. Naturally, there have been differences between these currents, which have kept them divided and over which they have argued (particularly with regard to the question of means), but each in its own way has effectively kept alive the goal of a communist society and has thus prevented capitalism from enjoying unchallenged ideological supremacy. What gives these currents added significance as a collective phenomenon is that they have emerged largely independently of one another at different historical junctures and in different geographical locations. Bordigism is as recognisably the product of Italian influences and circumstances as impossibilism owes much to its Anglo-Saxon origins. The repeated emergence of these organisationally separate and culturally distinct formulations of what still remains essentially the same communist alternative to capitalism suggests that it is in the nature of capitalism, wherever it exists, to evoke a communist response which does not vary in its fundamentals. From the standpoint of the late twentieth century, it may look as though capitalism rules the world untroubled and has successfully countered all attempts to replace it by communism. Yet, as the existence of these communist currents demonstrates, despite its apparatus of ideological domination, capitalism has proved unable to eradicate an alternative communist vision of how society could be organised. As long as varieties of this communist alternative remain to haunt capitalism, its supremacy is less than total and the possibility of achieving communism cannot be discounted.

It is with these considerations in mind that I have approached the study of the Japanese pure anarchists. Since capitalism is a world phenomenon, it would be strange indeed if communist ideological challenges to capitalism were all of European origin, like the five currents mentioned above. Obviously, of the European communist currents which I have identified, Japanese pure anarchism had most in common with European anarchist communism. Nevertheless, as I indicated earlier, the pure anarchists did not simply repeat parrot-fashion lessons learnt by rote from the European anarchist communists. The ability of the pure anarchists to take account of the way in which capitalism had developed in Japan, and to respond creatively to its special features by offering an alternative which was no less communist for being rooted in Japanese conditions, is further confirmation of the argument that capitalism invariably evokes a communist response from within the ranks of those whom it oppresses and exploits. Hence, despite Japanese pure anarchism’s lack of concrete success, its very existence can be regarded as significant when it is set within the international context outlined above. Particularly if one’s knowledge and experience of communism hitherto have conspired to give it the appearance of a predominantly European ideological construct, it can be more than a little exciting to recognise the pure anarchists as the Japanese equivalent of the European currents to which I have alluded.

A third reason for writing a book on the pure anarchists is the sophisticated theoretical level which the best among them were able to achieve. Writing from a European perspective in his chapter in Non-Market Socialism in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries , Alain Pengam claimed that after Kropotkin’s death in 1921 the theory of anarchist communism survived for a while, ‘but was consigned to isolation by the unfolding counter-revolution from the 1920s onwards’.

Unlike the Italian Left [Bordigists] and the German-Dutch council communists (the latter above all, with their criticism of the whole workers’ movement and their analysis of the general tendency for a unification of labour, capital and the state), the partisans of anarcho-communism did not really try to discover the causes of this counterrevolution; nor did they perceive its extent. As a result, their contributions amounted to little more than a formal defence of principles, without any critical depth. Moreover, these contributions ceased very rapidly. Sebastien Faure’s Mon Communisme appeared in 1921, Luigi Galleani’s The End of Anarchism? in 1925 and Alexander Berkman’s What Is Communist Anarchism? (better known in its abridged form as the ABC of Anarchism ) in 1929. [2]

Even with regard to Spanish anarchism, Pengam was sceptical whether the collectivisations in Spain from 1936 contained any anarchist communist potential, since he regarded Spanish ‘libertarian communism’ of the 1930s as an ‘empty phrase’. [3]

The contrast between the withering of anarchist communist theory in Europe after the First World War and its flowering in Japan during the interwar years is striking. As will be demonstrated in Chapter 1, in Europe after 1918 anarchist communists were largely content to echo Kropotkin’s writings and even tolerated a dilution of theoretical clarity, with the result that eventually anarchist communism ceased to have a coherent identity of its own and was incorporated into the wishy-washy cocktail of nondescript ‘anarchism’. By way of contrast, in interwar Japan the confrontation between anarchist syndicalists and their pure anarchist opponents forced the latter to define ever more clearly the theoretical bases of their activity. As a result, the interwar years were a period of intense theoretical innovation in Japan and, in contrast to what happened in Europe, anarchist communist theory did not stagnate at the points at which Kropotkin had left it or, worse still, even regress. There is a tendency among Japanese commentators to regret the confrontation that occurred between anarchist syndicalists and pure anarchists, and to regard it as the suicide of a movement already beleaguered by the twin enemies of capitalism and bolshevism. Yet, without such intense polemics between anarchist syndicalists and pure anarchists, anarchist communism would probably have withered on the bough in Japan as in Europe, so that there would be no particular reason today for studying a movement which displayed the same fading qualities as its contemporaries in Europe.

Among the theoreticians of pure anarchism none was more innovative or determined to rid anarchist theory of extraneous elements, derived from syndicalism or elsewhere, than Hatta Shūzō (1886–1934). Even in Japan, Hatta is largely forgotten these days outside of anarchist circles. I spent several months in Japan in 1990, engaged in research for this book, and I was struck by the fact that mention of my research theme prompted most scholars with whom J came in contact to dive for the biographical dictionary on their shelves to discover who on earth was Hatta Shūzō. Needless to say, in the West the situation is bleaker still and Hatta is totally unknown. This is incongruous, since in the West at least something is known about Japanese anarchism and, for example, both Kōtoku Shūsui (1871–1911) and Ōsugi Sakae (1885–1923) have had (albeit unsympathetic) biographies written on them by American scholars. [4] In Chapter 2 I explain Kōtoku’s and Ōsugi’s contributions to anarchism in Japan and it is certainly far from my purpose in this book to belittle either of them. Both are towering personalities in the history of Japanese anarchism. Yet it is also fair to say that neither can be considered to have made a significant, original contribution to anarchist theory. On the international level they are secondary figures, since the roles they fulfilled were mainly to introduce and popularise Western theories of anarchism in Japan. By way of contrast, fate has not been kind to a gifted and original thinker like Hatta. Language has acted as a barrier to an appreciation in the West of his stature as a theoretician, while in Japan the prevalence of bolshevism within the relevant scholarly circles has caused him to be ignored. Hopefully, the publication of this book, which is the first full-length study of Hatta Shūzō and pure anarchism to appear in any language, will belatedly bring to Hatta and his comrades a little of the recognition they richly deserve.

At any rate, to return to my first two reasons for writing this book, the reader can be assured that the chapters which follow will focus on a refreshingly rebellious breed of Japanese, one of whom was Hatta, and on theories which challenge every assumption on which the capitalist state in Japan (and elsewhere, for that matter) currently rests. Those disinclined to gawp in open-mouthed admiration at the soulless consumerism of modern Japan should read on. The pure anarchists make a welcome change from the human automata featured in the ubiquitous manuals on Japanese management techniques. Likewise, their ideas stand in complete contrast to the unquestioning acceptance of hierarchy and profit which, if the same sources were to be believed, is supposed to be a genetically imprinted characteristic of the Japanese. Happily, what the pure anarchists demonstrate is that there is nothing about being Japanese which prevents men and women from recognising the shortcomings of capitalism or which inoculates them against the vision of an alternative system of free, communist social relations.

Europe was the source of the anarchist communism that was introduced to Japan early in the twentieth century. In this chapter I shall give an account of anarchist communism as it developed within the political and intellectual milieu of Europe in the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century. Yet, although my focus in this chapter will be primarily European, bearing in mind the theme of this book, I shall pay particular attention to those aspects of anarchist communism which were to become controversial in the different setting of Japan in the 1920s and 1930s.

Anarchist communism is a revolutionary theory and practice which seeks to establish, by means which from the outset transcend the state, a society where individual freedom is reinforced by communal solidarity and mutual aid. It is probably most convenient to see anarchist communism as a tendency which crystallised within the wider European anarchist movement during the 1870s. This is not to say that prior to then there was nobody who combined commitment to anarchism (abolition of the state) with advocacy of communism (common ownership of the means of production and the social product). Théodore Dézamy (1808–50) and Joseph Déjacque (1822–64) were two such thinkers, [5] and Maximilien Rubel has pointed out that, contrary to popular opinion, Karl Marx (1818–83) was, in the senses given above, just as much of an anarchist as he was a communist. [6] However, self-proclaimed anarchist communism emerged within the anti-Marxist wing of the International Working Men’s Association (the First International) during the period 1876–80. François Dumartheray (1842–1931) was the first to use the term ‘anarchist communism’ when he wrote a pamphlet To the Manual Workers, Partisans of Political Action , which was published in Geneva in February 1876, and Elisée Reclus (1830–1905) is said to have delivered a speech from an anarchist communist standpoint in Lausanne in March of the same year. Similar ideas were spreading among the Italian anarchists, who adopted a communist resolution at their congress held near Florence in October 1876. Anarchist communism gained a further important victory when the Jura Federation, which was an influential anarchist grouping that had been active in the French-speaking area of Switzerland throughout the 1870s, proclaimed itself for communism at its congress held at La Chaux-de-Fonds in October 1880. Carlo Cafiero’s (1846–92) speech on ‘Anarchy and Communism’ at this congress was published in the Geneva journal Le Révolté in November 1880 and was one of the earliest written statements of anarchist communism. [7]

Cafiero explained that a communist society would function in line with the principle ‘from each according to his faculties to each according to his needs’ or, as he alternatively put it, ‘from each and to each according to his will’. [8] This was a break with the principle of collectivism which had previously prevailed in anarchist circles and which advocated that everyone’s share of the collective product should be proportional to their contribution to production. Cafiero recognised that communism was dependent on abundance, but he did not regard this as an obstacle ‘because in the future society production will be so abundant that there will be no need to limit consumption or to demand from men more work than they would be able or willing to give’. [9] He was confident that communism would create the conditions for such an abundance for several reasons, the chief of which were that cooperation would replace competition, there would be an immense extension of the use of machinery, and economies would result from the elimination of dangerous or useless sectors of production. Of course, there might be certain temporary shortages during the initial stages of communism but, if so, these would be handled by adopting a system of rationing which accorded with people’s needs, rather than with the hours of work they contributed to society. Two other features of Cafiero’s exposition of anarchist communism to which attention ought to be drawn are, first, that those who were to bring about the new society were the people themselves and not some inspired minority acting for them or leading them: ‘the taking of possession and the enjoyment of all the existing wealth must be, according to us, the deed of the people itself’. [10] Second, while Cafiero made it clear that he thought in terms of a worldwide society of communism, he nevertheless seemed to regard ‘countries’ as the natural units of organisation:

Since the common wealth is spread over the whole earth, and since all of it belongs by right to the whole of humanity, those who find this wealth within their reach and are in a position to use it will use it in common. The people of some country will use the land, the machines, the workshops, the houses, & c., of the country, and they will make use of it in common. Since they are part of humanity, they will exercise here, by deed and directly, their right to a share of the human wealth. But if an inhabitant of Peking came into this country, he would have the same rights as the others: he would enjoy, in common with the others, all the wealth of the country, in the same way that he had done in Peking. [11]

Although Petr Kropotkin crossed the dividing line between collectivism and communism rather more tardily than some of his comrades, by 1883 he had become the most able exponent of anarchist communism. [12] In a series of articles which appeared between 1886 and 1891 in the Paris-based journals Le Révolté and La Révolte , Kropotkin thought through the implications of anarchist communism in a far more systematic manner than earlier attempts, such as Cafiero’s, had done. When these articles were collected in book form to become The Conquest of Bread (first published in Paris in 1892), they became what was to be for many years the best known and most persuasive elucidation of anarchist communist theory and strategy. As a trained geographer, Kropotkin was anxious to bring to the investigation of social phenomena the same scientific method that underpinned his geographical studies and not to indulge in metaphysical speculation of the kind which he associated with Marxism. [13] Hence he was at pains to demonstrate that anarchist communism was not a utopian presentation of an ideal society but a theoretical reflection of practical initiatives and tendencies that were at work throughout society. Ultimately, however, his ethical preference for liberty and decentralisation proved stronger than his scientific objectivity, causing him to misread the evident trend of the times: ‘everywhere the State is abdicating and abandoning its holy functions to private individuals. Everywhere free organization trespasses on its domain.’ [14]

Despite this flaw in the scientific foundation, which Kropotkin attempted to give to anarchist communism, in other respects the theory which he constructed had a coherent logic to it. Kropotkin’s understanding of radical social change derived from the experiences which dominated European revolutionary thought throughout most of the nineteenth century – the French Revolution of 1789 and the various attempts to restage it (albeit with an outcome other than bourgeois power) at junctures such as 1848 and 1871. The revolutions which constituted Kropotkin’s main points of reference were essentially local uprisings of an insurrectionary people, often confined to a single centre such as Paris. In Kropotkin’s view, the reason why initially successful revolutions had repeatedly led to the consolidation of authoritarian regimes of one hue or another was their failure to guarantee in the shortest possible time well-being for the people. Unless a future revolution could swiftly eliminate the privations (such as hunger) which had caused the popular uprising in the first place, the people would rapidly become disillusioned and fall prey to a new leadership eager to install itself in power by means of plausible promises to establish a caring government. To avoid this outcome of revolutionary hopes being dashed against the rocks of reconstituted governmental power, the means of production within the revolutionary area would have to be expropriated immediately and set to work so as to produce an ample supply of the goods people needed. Food, clothing and shelter would be distributed by the people without regard to buying capacity, whether measured in terms of conventional money or some substitute for it, such as labour vouchers. Thus everyone would be secure in the knowledge that they had a right to receive from the common wealth free supplies of consumer goods. In the light of the demoralising hunger that past revolutions had brought with them, which had caused people to lose faith in their ability to run society efficiently in their own interest, the most pressing need was for the bakeries to be communalised and operated to produce bread in such plentiful amounts that it would be freely available to all. Such a state of affairs would constitute the ‘conquest of bread’, which was the image that the title of Kropotkin’s book was designed to conjure up in people’s minds, and which was intended as a symbol of a society of plenty achieved by communal solidarity.

Naturally, Kropotkin was not so unrealistic as to imagine that a revolution could immediately usher in a condition of universal abundance of all the numerous goods that people might choose to consume. Hence the principle which was to govern distribution was ‘no stint or limit to what the community possesses in abundance, but equal sharing and dividing of those things which are scarce or apt to run short’. [15] But in the case of essentials, such as food, Kropotkin considered that abundance could be attained rapidly and his expectation was that, over time, the proportion of goods needing to be rationed would dwindle to zero. The anarchist communist project thus had nothing in common with the plans of some perhaps well-meaning but nevertheless authoritarian revolutionaries to take over the existing process of production and use revolutionary power so as to divide up the social product more equitably. Kropotkin believed that what made anarchist communism distinctive was that its approach would be not to take production as a given and then decide how the cake should be divided, but to start with the people entirely rethinking their consumption needs and then reorganising production so as to achieve the required output of goods. In other words, in contradistinction to conventional economics, which he saw as proceeding from production to consumption, anarchist communism would reverse the sequence, so that consumption determined production. When Kropotkin returned to this theme several years later in Modern Science and Anarchism (1903) he expressed himself as follows:

Anarchism understands therefore that in political economy attention must be directed first of all to so-called ‘consumption,’ and that the first concern of the revolution must be to reorganize that so as to provide food, clothing and shelter for all. ‘Production,’ on the other hand, must be so adapted as to satisfy this primary, fundamental need of society. [16]

When political economy was conceived in this fashion, it would become a science whose essence was captured by the term the ‘physiology of society’, since its attention would be directed towards ‘the study of the needs of mankind, and the means of satisfying them with the least possible waste of human energy’. [17]

Clearly, the degree of social restructuring which would be a consequence of setting production on a scientific footing would be immense. But, given the conditions that were likely to apply in the event of revolution, there was an even more pressing need for social reorganisation than the somewhat abstract requirement to introduce scientific rationality into the realms of consumption and production. Since Kropotkin expected future revolutions, as in the past, to occur in limited geographical areas, production within a revolutionary commune would need to be reorganised swiftly so as to make the territory it held largely self-sufficient and not fatally reliant on surrounding areas, which might still be in the hands of the counter-revolution. To restate this in more concrete terms, if revolution were to break out in an urban, manufacturing centre, such as Paris, the city could not afford to remain dependent on the surrounding countryside for its food supplies. Kropotkin expected revolutions to occur unevenly in different localities and different countries, and this was a telling, practical reason why production would need to be diversified. with agriculture spreading into the towns, and industrial workshops being set up in those rural locations which opted for revolution. Max Nettlau was thus quite right when he described The Conquest of Bread as ‘the utopia of a large city in revolt, proclaiming its autonomy, besieged by enemies and working out its own complete social life by its own resources. It was—the Commune of Paris, as Kropotkin wished that it should act when it would happen the next time.’ [18]

In addition to the exigencies of revolution leading to the emergence of decentralised communes practising diversified production, there was a further reason why Kropotkin spoke out against specialisation in production and the division of labour within society. Not only did such arrangements create social imbalances, but they also resulted in lopsided individuals, rather than the well-rounded men, women and children whom Kropotkin expected to inhabit an anarchist communist society. No less important than achieving a combination of agriculture and industry in each locality was the desirability of bringing about a merging of ‘the husbandman and the mechanic in the same individual’. [19] Participation in, and taking an intelligent interest in, varied forms of production would be the guarantee that society would be made up of people healthy in body as well as mind. Work was to be restructured not only in such a way as to achieve the required levels of consumption but also so as to make it interesting and enjoyable. If such changes were made, then even urbanised ‘men, women and children will gladly turn to the labour of the fields, when it is no longer a slavish drudgery, but has become a pleasure, a festival, a renewal of health and joy’. [20]

Despite the crucial need for a ‘city in revolt’ to be able to feed itself, it would be wrong to think that Kropotkin envisaged anarchist communist society as a collection of autarkic communes. Revolution was expected to be an ongoing process so that, whereas initially a revolutionary commune might have to exist entirely by its own efforts, surrounding areas would sooner or later be influenced by the revolutionary example in their midst. While an urban commune should endeavour to plough up ‘the parks and pleasure grounds of the landed gentry’ that fell within its area of control, and hence become self-sufficient in food production, it should also make practical efforts to win over to the revolution the peasantry in the surrounding countryside. [21] It is worth quoting Kropotkin at some length on how this should be done, because the following passage exposes his lack of clarity on economic relations between different areas:

We must offer the peasant in exchange for his toil not worthless paper-money, but the manufactured articles of which he stands in immediate need ...

Let the town apply itself, without loss of time, to manufacturing all that the peasant needs, instead of fashioning geegaws for the wives of rich citizens ... Let the factories and foundries turn out agricultural implements, spades, rakes and such-like …

... let them [the towns] send friendly embassies to the country folk and bid them in brotherly fashion: ‘Bring us your produce, and take from our stores and shops all the manufactured articles you please.’ Then provisions would pour in on every side. The peasant would only withhold what he needed for his own use, and would send the rest into the cities, feeling for the first time in the course of history that these toiling townsfolk were his comrades—his brethren, and not his exploiters …

This, then, is our view of the whole question. Cheat the peasant no longer with scraps of paper—be the sums inscribed upon them ever so large; but offer him in exchange for his produce the very things of which he, the tiller of the soil, stands in need. Then the fruits of the land will be poured into the towns. If this is not done there will be famine in our cities, and reaction and despair will follow in its train. [22]

The precise nature of the relationship between town and countryside which is described here is open to interpretation. On the one hand. the repeated use of the expression ‘in exchange’ suggests that it is a quid pro quo exchange relationship (even if not mediated by money) that Kropotkin envisages. On the other hand, the invitation from the townspeople to the peasants to ‘ bring us your produce, and take from our stores and shops all the manufactured articles you please’ implies that the relationship is to be based on free distribution, without regard for equivalent exchange. Kropotkin’s later writings did little to resolve this ambiguity and hence, on this important question, it was an ambivalent legacy which he left to later generations of anarchists.

Other areas of ambivalence in Kropotkin’s theory of anarchist communism are the roles to be played by anarchist groups and by the labour movement. As we have seen, Kropotkin’s image of revolution essentially consisted of the people rising in insurrection. Yet, if the people as a whole were to carry out the revolution, what room did this leave for either anarchist groups or labour organisations to engage in struggles of their own? As far as anarchist groups were concerned, Caroline Cahm’s careful study of Kropotkin’s thought in the context of the revolutionary anarchist movement between 1872 and 1886 led her to conclude that ‘Kropotkin stressed the role of heroic minorities in the preparation for revolution.’ [23] The key words here are in the preparation for revolution . By their courage and daring in opposing capitalism and the state, anarchist minorities could teach by example and thereby draw increasing numbers into the struggle. But Kropotkin was not advocating substitutionism; the idea that a minority might carry out the revolution in place of the people was as alien to him as the notion that a minority would exercise rule after the revolution. In fact, Kropotkin recognised that the former would be a prescription for the latter.

As for the labour movement, Kropotkin paid virtually no attention to workers’ organisations in the articles which constituted The Conquest of Bread. With the passage of time, however, he not only took note of the spread of labour unions but was loath to surrender these organisations, and the opportunities they provided, to social democrats and other opponents of anarchism. There was thus an increasing tendency for Kropotkin to see labour unions as organisations in which workers could become aware of the shortcomings of capitalism and, through struggle, could become conscious of their collective ability to run the economy without recourse to either the capitalists or the state. Positive evaluation of labour unions appeared both in the 1903 work Modern Science and Anarchism, where Kropotkin wrote:

As to anarchist communism, it is certain that this solution wins more and more ground nowadays among those working-men who try to get a clear conception as to the forthcoming revolutionary action. The syndicalist and trade union movements, which permit the workingmen to realize their solidarity and to feel the community of their interests much better than any elections, prepare the way for these conceptions. [24]

and in a letter to L. Bertoni (dated 2 March 1914) where he put it as follows:

The syndicat is absolutely necessary .. It is the sole force of the workers which continues the direct struggle against capital without turning to parliamentarism. [25]

Nevertheless, Kropotkin was also aware that by no means all unions fulfilled this function. In a letter to Max Nettlau (dated 5 April 1895) he also argued:

There are trade unions which egotistically struggle for higher wages or shorter hours [to achieve] emancipation. These unions are wrong, and often as monopoly-striving as capitalists. But labour unions, with the view of fighting against capitalism directly are different things. [26]

Hence once can say that, even when Kropotkin’s earlier indifference towards the labour movement was replaced by recognition of the growing importance of workers’ organisations, his enthusiasm was qualified by acute awareness of the shortcomings of many unions.

It was the rise of the labour movement which brought about changes not merely in Kropotkin’s ideas, but in the character of the anarchist movement in countries such as France. In France national union federations developed in the 1880s and 1890s, and not a few anarchists found that the labour unions provided a congenial environment for their activity. From the unions’ point of view, sections of their membership felt the need for a political philosophy which would give further meaning to the day-to-day struggles in which they were engaged and, indeed, would sustain them through the hardships which such conflicts often involved. The result was the hybrid doctrine of anarchist syndicalism.

From anarchism, anarchist syndicalism derived its distrust of political parties and parliamentary politics, its preference for federal organisation rather than centralisation, and its anticipation of an approaching social revolution. Despite these anarchist elements, the importance which anarchist syndicalism accorded to the union form of organisation ensured that it was distinct from other varieties of anarchism. Anarchist syndicalists believed that unions ( syndicats in French) had a potential which extended far beyond their primary function of defending workers’ interests within capitalism. Struggles by unions for limited objectives within the framework of capitalism were held to have a vital educative role, teaching workers the importance of solidarity and raising their sights beyond partial work stoppages to the ultimate objective of revolution in the form of the social general strike. On this reading of their significance, unions became the means of social revolution. In fact, even this formulation understates the importance attributed by anarchist syndicalists to the labour unions, since they believed that not only were the unions destined to carry out the revolution, but they would also provide the framework for administering the new society of the future. It was this set of linked propositions which lay behind the oft-repeated assertion made by anarchist syndicalists that, in organising labour unions, they were constructing the core of a new society within the shell of the society they sought to replace.

Anarchist syndicalist influence increased within the French union movement throughout the 1890s and early 1900s, as was demonstrated by the Charter of Amiens, which the Confédération Générale de Travail (General Confederation of Labour or CGT) adopted in 1906. This charter was a declaration of the union movement’s independence from all political parties and it became a very influential statement of anarchist syndicalist principle. As we shall see, when the Zenkoku Rōdō Kumiai Jiyū Rengōkai (AlI-Japan Libertarian Federation of Labour Unions or Zenkoku Jiren) was formed in Japan in 1926, the influence of the Charter of Amiens on the platform it adopted at its founding conference was striking. However, initially the CGT’s influence was evident closer to home, as shown by the formation of the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (National Confederation of Labour or CNT) in Spain in 1910.

Organisational successes, such as the stamping of an anarchist syndicalist character on the CGT and the founding of the CNT, were matched by corresponding developments in the realm of theory. Yet here there were many anarchists who resisted the anarchist syndicalists’ tendency to see the unions as the be-all and end-all of the struggle for a new society. One famous debate was that which occurred at the International Anarchist Congress in Amsterdam in 1907 between the Italian anarchist communist Errico Malatesta (1853–1932) and Pierre Monatte (1881–1960) of the CGT. Monatte’s uncritical enthusiasm for union activity was such that it leaned towards a ‘pure syndicalism’ from which anarchism had been drained entirely, whereas Malatesta, while not opposed to anarchists being active in labour unions, was not prepared to allow the anarchist communist vision of a new society to be eclipsed by the immediate tactical concerns of unions engaged in the class struggle. This was a theme to which Malatesta was to return repeatedly in later years, as when he wrote:

There are those who call themselves ‘anarcho-syndicalists’; or when they link up with others who are really not anarchists, they take the name of ‘revolutionary syndicalists’. It is necessary to explain what is meant by ‘syndicalism’.

If it is a question of the sought-after future, if, that is, by syndicalism is meant the form of social organisation which should replace the capitalistic and statal organisation, then either it is the same as anarchy, and is therefore a term which only serves to confuse matters, or it is different from anarchy and cannot therefore be accepted by anarchists. Indeed, among the ideas and plans for the future put forward by this or that syndicalist, there are some which are genuinely anarchist, but there are others which present, under different names, and in different guises, the authoritarian structure which is the cause of the evils which today we complain of, and therefore can have nothing in common with anarchy. [27]

As the cases of both Kropotkin and Malatesta demonstrate, anarchist communism was not completely overwhelmed by anarchist syndicalism, but it was put on the defensive, since it could not match the organisational achievements of the mass union federations, such as the CGT. The typical form of anarchist communist organisation was the ‘group’ of like-minded individuals, which would be infused with a recognisable ideological orientation but would lack a defined membership, officials, procedural rules and so forth. The only other elements which gave any semblance of structure to the anarchist communist movement were the journals they published. Apart from their obvious propaganda function, these journals provided the movement with its public ‘face’, and acted both as channels of communication and foci for coordinated activity by the otherwise dispersed anarchist communist groups. While most journals led a precarious existence, both due to lack of funds and the oppression of the authorities, they replaced one another in more or less continuous succession and hence were a constant presence in the collective sense, no matter how short-lived the majority of such publications might be.

The reason for the tension which developed between anarchist communism and anarchist syndicalism during the 1890s and 1900s is clear enough. The anarchist communists lacked the mass following of the syndicats, but they could point out that there was a price to pay for attracting a membership that was primarily interested in the day-to-day struggle. Again, Malatesta’s writings of the 1920s provide us with one of the most quotable examples of the kind of arguments that were already circulating twenty years earlier:

it would be a great and fatal illusion to believe, as many do, that the workers’ movement can and must on its own, by its very nature, lead to such a revolution. On the contrary, all movements founded on material and immediate interests (and a mass working class movement cannot be founded on anything else), if the ferment, the drive and the unremitting efforts of men of ideas struggling and making sacrifices for an ideal future are lacking, lend to adapt themselves to circumstances, foster a conservative spirit, and the fear of change in those who manage to improve their conditions, and often end up by creating new privileged classes and serving to support and consolidate the system which one would want to destroy. [28]

Nevertheless, other factors were also at work which had the opposite effect of muting anarchist communist criticism of anarchist syndicalism and fostering a sense of common identity among anarchists of all persuasions. Faced with the frequently vicious repression mounted by the capitalist state, disputes between anarchists over the relative merits of communism and syndicalism often seemed like a luxury which neither side could afford, particularly when the authorities made no distinction in their attempts to suppress all shades of anarchist opinion. In addition, the capitalist state was not the only enemy with which the anarchists had to contend. It was galling to observe social democratic parties and reformist unions acquiring mass followings and thereby, to the anarchists’ way of thinking, raising new obstacles to social revolution. Confronted by the evident success of social democracy and reformist unionism, many anarchist communists, whatever their reservations about anarchist syndicalism, took comfort from the fact that at least some who called themselves anarchists were able, in certain contexts, to build a mass movement and outperform those who were using the labour movement as a means to advance their careers or gain political power.

The trend towards diluting anarchist communism’s theoretical clarity, to which we have alluded here and which we noted earlier in Kropotkin’s writings, was already under way before the First World War, but the outcome of the 1917 Russian Revolution gave fresh momentum in that direction. The Russian Revolution raised enormous hopes among anarchist communists, to the extent that some, like Alexander Berkman, who was deported from the USA to Russia in 1919, initially cooperated with the bolsheviks. In a Letter to the Workers of Western Europe, which Kropotkin wrote two years after his return to Russia in 1917, he expressed enthusiasm for the soviets or councils of workers and peasants: ‘the idea of soviets, that is to say, of councils of workers and peasants ... controlling the economic and political life of the country is a great idea. All the more so, since it necessarily follows that these councils should be composed of all who take a real part in the production of national wealth by their own efforts.’ [29] As Berkman and Kropotkin were well aware, however, the bolsheviks were relentlessly tightening their grip on state power, misappropriating the title soviet and persecuting the anarchists. The year 1921 saw Kropotkin’s death, the brutal suppression of the Kronstadt rebellion, and Berkman’s decision to leave Russia.

The tendency for anarchist communists to give ground in their theory can be illustrated by the case of Alexander Berkman. Berkman remained an anarchist communist until his suicide in 1936, and in 1929 he wrote What Is Communist Anarchism? (which, symbolically, is better known in its abridged version as the ABC of Anarchism ). While What Is Communist Anarchism? remained a recognisably anarchist communist text, Berkman incorporated into his account of communist society and the means to achieve it, elements which were drawn from anarchist syndicalism and elsewhere. According to Berkman, ‘the social revolution can take place only by means of the General Strike’ and he considered factory committees and labour unions to be important training grounds for the revolution, since they provide the setting within which ‘preparation for a new economic system, for a new social life’ can take place. [30] Not surprisingly, this led him to a positive evaluation of the anarchist syndicalists:

Large numbers of progressive working-men are coming to this understanding: the Industrial Workers of the World and the revolutionary anarchist-syndicalists in every country are devoting themselves to this end. [31]

The familiar elements of communism, as it had been envisaged by Cafiero, Kropotkin and others, were present in Berkman’s sketch of the new society. These included abolition of the state, decentralisation, voluntary labour, free distribution of products and so forth. Yet although there were passages in What Is Communist Anarchism? that could be interpreted as references to the type of self-supporting communes which Kropotkin had described in The Conquest of Bread, the process of revolution which Berkman envisaged was clearly different from that which Kropotkin had anticipated. Whereas Kropotkin had extrapolated from previous revolutionary experience and had therefore thought in terms of localised insurrections, Berkman expected revolution to take place on the terrain since established by capitalist industry. The reason why Berkman identified the general strike as the key to revolution was that, for him, the crucial step in any revolution had become the workers taking over ‘their’ industries and operating them under their own control. Thus miners were to take over the mines, steelworkers the steel plants, railwayworkers the railways, and so on. When it came to running these industries, Berkman had the following suggestions to make:

Every factory, mine, and mill should have its special workers’ council, separate from and independent of the shop committee, for the purpose of familiarising the workers with the various phases of their particular industry, including the sources of raw material, the consecutive processes of manufacture, by-products, and manner of distribution. This industrial council should be permanent, but its membership must rotate in such a manner as to take in practically all the employees of a given factory or mill ... In this manner the whole factory or mill can consecutively acquire the necessary knowledge about the organisation and management of their trade and keep step with its development. These councils would serve as industrial colleges where the workers would become familiar with the technique of their industry in all its phases. [32]

Berkman anticipated that by such means industrial production would be democratised. It was not, however, merely the how but also the why of industrial production that was to be radically redefined. To take a concrete example:

The coal miners, for instance, will deliver the coal they mined to the public yards for the use of the community. In their turn the miners will receive from the community’s warehouses the machinery, tools, and the other commodities they need. That means free exchange without the medium of money and without profit, on the basis of requirement, and the supply on hand. [33]

While these suggestions represented a fundamental break with the methods and objective of industrial capitalism, the extent to which Berkman’s new society would bear the imprint of the society from which it sought to escape should not be underestimated. In contrast to Kropotkin’s hope that each individual in the society of the future would combine the skills of ‘the husbandman and the mechanic’, Berkman envisaged a society still populated by miners, steelworkers’, railwayworkers and so forth. Similarly, in contrast to Kropotkin’s idea of transcending the division of labour by dispersing industry into the villages and bringing agriculture into the cities, the physical and social structure of communist society as Berkman imagined it was still to consist of distinct foci of industry and of separate urban and rural locations. In this sense, it was no mere rhetorical turn of phrase when Berkman admitted that ‘capitalism is the parent of the new society’. [34]

The image of communism which Berkman’s text projected is one which replicates many of the structures of capitalism, even if strenuous efforts are made to democratise them. One can interpret this development in different fashions. Either the trend which Berkman exemplified was a case of anarchist communists coming to terms with industrialisation, recognising that some of the changes which capitalism had brought about were here to stay irrespective of the capitalist or communist nature of society, and adjusting their strategy in line with the increasing proletarianisation of the workforce. Or it was a case of anarchist communists watering down their theory, retreating from their earlier determination to achieve an entirely different society to that based on economic specialisation and industrial concentration, and hence diluting their opposition to capitalism’s division of labour.

One final development within European anarchist communism that needs to be noted for later comparative purposes was the publication of the Organisational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists by the Group of Russian Anarchist Communists Abroad in Paris in 1926. This group consisted of anarchist communists who had been driven into exile by the bolsheviks and included Petr Arshinov (1887–1937), the principal author of the Organisational Platform, and Nestor Makhno (1889–1934), whose guerilla forces had fought against the bolsheviks and the Whites and had controlled large areas of the Ukraine between 1918 and 1921. Reflecting the defeat which the anarchists had suffered in Russia at the hands of the better organised bolsheviks, the Organisational Platform sought to establish a General Union of Anarchists equipped with ‘a general and tactical and political line which would serve as a guide to the whole movement’. [35] What was distinctive about the Organisational Platform was that, while the ends to which the anarchist struggle was directed were defined as libertarian communism, whose ‘fundamental economic, social and juridical principle’ would be ‘from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs’, the means to be employed were totally at odds with those traditionally advocated by anarchist communists. [36] The strategy which the Organisational Platform recommended essentially consisted of adopting bolshevik means in order to compete more effectively with bolshevism and thereby achieve anarchist ends. The essence of this strategy is captured in the following passage:

Every organisation adhering to the [General Union of Anarchists] represents a vital cell of the common organism. Every cell should have its secretariat, executing and guiding theoretically the political and technical work of the organisation.

With a view to the coordination of the activity of all the Union’s adherent organisations, a special organ will be created: the executive committee of the Union. This committee will be in charge of the following functions: the execution of decisions taken by the Union with which it is entrusted; the theoretical and organisational orientation of the activity of isolated organisations consistent with the theoretical positions and the general tactical line of the Union; the monitoring of the general state of the movement; the maintenance of working and organisational links between all the organisations in the Union; and with other organisations.

The rights, responsibilities and practical tasks of the executive committee are fixed by the congress of the Union ...

Born out of the heart of the mass of the labour people, the General Union must take part in all the manifestations of their life, bringing to them on every occasion the spirit of organisation, perseverance, action and offensive. Only in this way can it fulfil its task, its theoretical and historical mission in the social revolution of labour, and become the organised vanguard of their emancipatory process. [37]

Berkman’s rejoinder to this proposal was that it amounted to advocating an Anarchist Communist Party. [38] This was a perceptive comment, for in 1934 the Nihon Museifu Kyōsantō (Anarchist Communist Party of Japan) was formed on a similar platform and attempted, with disastrous consequences, to press bolshevik methods into the service of anarchism.

What this chapter has sought to do is to give a brief account of anarchist communism’s emergence in Europe in the 1870s, its subsequent development into a political doctrine of considerable depth and sophistication in the writings of Kropotkin and others, and its accelerated decline after the Russian Revolution. As will become clear from the chapters which follow, the very period which in Europe saw the dilution of anarchist communist theory, and its absorption into the increasingly vague and amorphous hotchpotch of ‘anarchism’, was in Japan a time of intense organisational confrontation and theoretical controversy between ‘pure anarchists’ (as the anarchist communists were often known in Japan) and anarchist syndicalists. Instead of regressing, as in Europe, in Japan anarchist communist theory was developed further and pushed beyond the theoretical frontiers established by Kropotkin and his comrades. In so doing, the Japanese pure anarchists not merely built up a movement which bravely challenged the militaristic state and made important contributions to anarchist communist theory. In their criticisms of industry, science and urbanisation, they anticipated by half a century several concerns which have been at the heart of the modern Green movement, and which, indeed, have recently given a new lease of life to anarchist communism in the shape of ‘ecological anarchism’. All of these are good reasons why a Western-language study of Japanese pure anarchism is long overdue.

It is an arbitrary decision where one locates the historical origins of anarchism in Japan. After the implantation of Western anarchism into Japan, Japanese anarchists identified a native anarchist tradition within their own culture. For example, the Nihon Heimin Shinbun (Japan Common People’s Newspaper) of 20 January 1908 carried an article on the eighteenth century thinker Andō Shōeki, describing him as ‘an anarchist of 150 years ago’, and in 1979 the Tōkyō-based Libertaire group referred to Andō as an advocate of ‘agricultural communist anarchism’. [39] For the purposes of this book, however, it is not necessary to go back further than 1906. In 1906 the most influential socialist of his generation, Kōtoku Shūsui, returned from six months spent in California and astounded his social-democratic comrades by questioning the usefulness of contesting parliamentary elections in a speech which he made at a public meeting held in Tōkyō on 28 June to welcome him back to Japan. [40]

Kōtoku had been a founder member of the Shakai Minshutō (Social Democratic Party) when it was formed in May 1901, although this venture had proved abortive since the party was immediately banned. He originated from Kōchi Prefecture which, under its pre-revolutionary name of Tosa, had been one of the cradles of the Japanese Revolution (the ‘Meiji Restoration’) of 1868. After moving to Tōkyō for higher education, Kōtoku had become a journalist in 1893. Ten years later, in October 1903, he resigned from his newspaper when it came out in support of the impending Russo-Japanese War (1904–5). The following month, Kōtoku and his comrades launched an anti-war journal, the weekly Heimin Shinbun (Common People’s Newspaper), as a result of which he was imprisoned for five months in February 1905 on charges arising from the Draconian press laws. It was Kōtoku’s direct experience of state repression, and his disgust with the way in which the figurehead of the Emperor was used to justify exploitation at home and militaristic aggression abroad, that led him from social democracy towards anarchism. For these reasons, his stay in the USA can be said to have brought to a head a development in his political ideas that was discernible even before he left Japan. [41]

Kōtoku’s speech on 28 June 1906 was followed by various articles written by him for the socialist press in which he expounded his new ideas. In one article he analysed the results of the general election held in Germany in January 1907:

What the European working class needs is not to elect a majority of deputies but to gain the assurance of food and clothes and shelter. It does not need the eloquent phrases of Bebel or Jaures. What it does need is to achieve the social revolution. It is not laws which produce food and clothes, any more than it is votes which can be the means of revolution. We believe that if the European socialist parties persist in their adherence to nothing but a parliamentary policy, they will in the end be incapable of functioning as the revolutionary parties of the working class. They will end up as nothing more than alternative bourgeois parties. As a result, the workers themselves will all desert them and turn to anarchist communism. [42]

A few days later, in the most famous of these articles, entitled ‘The Change in My Thought’, Kōtoku asserted

A real social revolution cannot possibly be achieved by means of universal suffrage and a parliamentary policy. There is no way to reach our goal of socialism other than by the direct action of the workers, united as one. [43]

Additional weight was added to Kōtoku’s pronouncements by a letter he received from Kropotkin, which was also published in the socialist press. During the six months Kōtoku had spent in the USA he had come under the influence of various anarchists, not the least influential of whom was his Russian-born landlady in San Francisco, a certain Mrs Fritz. Mrs Fritz had thoughtfully decorated the room that she let to Kōtoku with a picture of Mikhail Bakunin (1814–76) on one wall and a picture of Kropotkin on another, and it was she who forwarded to Kropotkin a letter that Kōtoku wrote in San Francisco, a letter in which he asked Kropotkin’s permission to translate some of his works into Japanese. By the time Kōtoku received a reply to his letter he had already returned to Japan, and it was published in the journal Hikari (Light) on 25 November 1906. Kropotkin’s letter was polite rather than stirring, but perhaps its most interesting feature, in view of the later anti-syndicalist direction taken by the pure anarchism which he inspired in Japan, was that his remarks reveal him at his most generous towards syndicalism. To the best of my knowledge, the original text of Kropotkin’s letter has been lost but. translating back into English from the Japanese, it read:

Mrs. Fritz has forwarded your letter to me and also informed me that you stayed with them in San Francisco.
