---
title: "Beyond May Day Parades"
author: "Lucien van der Walt, Warren McGregor, Sian Byrne, Muttaqa Yushau Abdulra’uf"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/muttaqa-yushau-abdulra-uf-sian-byrne-warren-mcgregor-and-lucien-van-der-walt-beyond-may-day-par"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Building a Counter-Movement in Malaysia and Worldwide"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "muttaqa-yushau-abdulra-uf-sian-byrne-warren-mcgregor-and-lucien-van-der-walt-beyond-may-day-par.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/muttaqa-yushau-abdulra-uf-sian-byrne-warren-mcgregor-and-lucien-van-der-walt-beyond-may-day-par.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ANARCHISM, CHICAGO AND MAY DAY        MAY DAY: GLOBAL STRIKE OR RITUAL PARADE?        TAKING UNIONISM FORWARD        WHERE TO NEXT?        MAY DAY, ANARCHISM AND UNIONISM IN MALAYSIA        MAY DAY TODAY: GLOBALISE FROM BELOW        NEO-LIBERALISM AT THE CROSSROADS — WHAT NEXT?        CONCLUSION: WORKING CLASS POWER FOR A BETTER WORLD        REFERENCES Let us learn from our past struggles, in the USA and in Malaysia. May Day should be an occasion to reflect not jubilate, to engage not agonize, to demand not relent, and to organise, not complain. We need systemic change that can guarantee equality, fraternity, self-management and socialisation of the commonwealth, guided by a bottom–up approach to decision making. We need a labour movement that is multicultural and international, feminist, active in urban and rural struggles, and that prizes reason over superstition, justice over hierarchy, self-management over state power, international solidarity over nationalism. We need to fight for a universal human community, not parochialism and separatism. The organisational power and strategic location of the Malaysian union movement provides an excellent point of departure for building this counter-movement. This is our appeal and message as we celebrate this May Day, on the eve of dark days in which the storm clouds gather over humanity – but in which the light of hope of a better future can break through, if we arm ourselves with the correct ideas and approaches. May Day began as an example of globalisation-from-below. Let us rally to it. Let us take back its original vision: liberty, equality, unity. May Day, popularly known as international workers day, started with a historic fight for decent working hours that culminated in the execution of four trade unionists in Chicago, United States, in November 1887. This was a decisive moment in the struggle for a just society through militant trade unionism. May Day was globalised from 1889 by the workers’ movement, being held in China from 1919, and in Malaysia from 1921. Today it remains a key day of reference – but its roots and aims are often forgotten. May Day commemorations can be a platform to harness the power of the working class and poor into a counter-movement for social protection and changed society. Ordinary people worldwide face ecological problems, economic crisis, massive unemployment, low wages, denials of right to freedom of association, vulnerable, informal work and sub-contracting, suffering as immigrants– all in the context of destructive market competition and the rule of self-serving politicians and bosses. Solutions do not lie in reformed capitalism or in the free market: the problems humanity faces have gotten worse. Capitalism adversely affects working class communities and their livelihoods; states act to enforce these horrors with laws and guns. In Malaysia, this destruction is manifested in an ecological crisis expressed in disasters such as flooding that displaces tens of thousands, police brutality against picketing workers (like the National Union of Tobacco Industry), and a massive gap between rich and poor, powerful and powerless. Unions need to be central to the fight to win social protection floors, decent conditions and a better future for the Malaysian working family. This article draws attention to the alternative: the “anarchist” ethos of firstly, building a working and poor people’s counter-culture to unravel the dominant class culture in society; and secondly, building a counter-power from below, that draws its energy from the trade unions and workers, the unemployed, the poor and the peasantry (small farmers), to fight to change the world for the better. Let us start by looking at what the “Chicago Martyrs” died for – and then at the historical role and the future potential of Malaysian trade unions in the fight for justice and equality. What the “Chicago Martyrs” died for in 1887 is often forgotten. These comrades were, in truth, proudly…
