---
title: "The Difference between Anarchy and the Academy"
author: "Peter Gelderloos"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-the-difference-between-anarchy-and-the-academy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "16 July 2009 P. Gelderloos, personal communication, August 9, 2009"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-gelderloos-the-difference-between-anarchy-and-the-academy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-the-difference-between-anarchy-and-the-academy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

I recently had the opportunity to participate in the international academic conference, “Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations,” put on by the Russian Academy of Sciences, in Moscow. I was on two panels focused on building alternatives to hierarchy and current state repression of social movements. I find this amusing because I am a college dropout: I didn’t even finish three semesters of university, I generally dislike academics, and I believe the academy is one of the institutions of power that need to be abolished. Of over a hundred participants, I think I was one of only two who were not a PhD or a PhD candidate (and the other lowbrow was on the same panels as I) and the only one without any university degree. It would have been funny and worthwhile if I had scammed my way there — in fact university credentials are easy to forge, so radicals who want to be teachers need not waste five years of their lives getting the right papers. But in this case I was invited by the panel organizers, who also have their criticisms of the academy and wanted to put together panels without so great a theoretical remove from the actuality of social movements and repression. If I were an anthropologist I could write quite an ethnology about that queer tribe of academics. But from my vantage as an anarchist I can find even more to say. It would be as easy as dogma to point out that the academy is one of the ruling institutions, therefore it’s our enemy, and that’s the end of it. This would also obscure the more complicated and useful realities. Universities have also been a hotspot (or shall I say “locus”?) for rebellion and social movements. My Russian friends tell me that the anarchist movement there largely re-emerged from the History Department in the ‘80s, and its last aboveground stronghold was the museum at the Kropotkin House, finally shut down in 1931. In between rebellions universities provide lots of free food, free copies, funding, media of communication (e.g. presentations to student bodies), spaces, and employment. University connections can mitigate state repression and confer legitimacy on those social rebels who masquerade, at least temporarily, as dissidents. It is no coincidence that scams to win free resources are so easy at universities. The university is intended to be a relatively liberated space within the framework of domination. I personally know several academics who are sincere anti-authoritarians and who have taught me a lot. And I know some people who are straight up anarchists who happen to have jobs within the academy. I can’t think of any other elite institution with so many good people in it who don’t forget social questions when they go to work but rather address them directly. But where anarchy and the academy intersect, I always ask myself: are these people anarchist academics or academic anarchists? Howard Ehrlich, Noam Chomsky, Michael Albert, David Graeber, bell hooks (not an anarchist but theoretically relevant to many anarchists), and Pyotr Kropotkin have all said or done things I find extremely naive and damaging, in ways that directly reflect their privileged relationship with authority as members of an elite institution. But who could deny their contributions to the movement? Well, anarchists can deny anything, but most of us find something worthwhile in the work of at least some of those scholars. And without them, the movement would only have people who do research like John Zerzan (or me, for that matter). And research is a major area where the academy can be useful to anarchists. They have us cornered when it comes to investigation and critical debate. Anarchists are lazy researchers. Many prefer religion to research. Objective, and objectively false, statements that bear great importance for anarchist theory circulate freely in our circles. Some of the basic premises of primitivist, vegan, and historical materialist strains of anarchism would have been abandoned long ago if we’d ha…
