---
title: "A Girl Among the Anarchists"
author: "Olivia Rossetti, Helen Rossetti"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/isabel-meredith-a-girl-among-the-anarchists"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;www.archive.org/details/girlamonganarchi00mere&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "isabel-meredith-a-girl-among-the-anarchists.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/isabel-meredith-a-girl-among-the-anarchists.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Synopsis        Preface        Chapter I: A Strange Childhood        Chapter II: A Gathering in Chiswick        Chapter III: An Abortive Group-meeting        Chapter IV: A Police Scare        Chapter V: To the Rescue        Chapter VI: A Foreign Invasion        Chapter VII: The Office of the tocsin        Chapter VIII: The Dynamitard’s Escape        Chapter IX: Some Anarchist Personalities        Chapter X: A Flight        Chapter XI: A Crisis        Chapter XII: The Tocsin’s Last Toll Isabel Meredith is the narrator of A Girl among the Anarchists and the pseudonym of Helen and Olivia Rossetti, daughters of William Michael Rossetti and nieces of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Their fin-de-siecle tenure as editors of the renowned British anarchist journal The Torch provided the experience that went into this entertaining and knowing novel. Young Isabel’s description of her upbringing echoes the eccentricities of the Rosetti household. Isolated, restless, she feels a strong desire to “free” herself from “all the ideas, customs, and prejudices” of her class and to throw herself “into the life and work of the masses.” She becomes immersed in a subversive community that was seldom seen by bourgeois women in late Victorian England. In picaresque fashion she recounts outlandish vignettes of the anarchist life-style. But in growing from a girl to a woman Isabel undergoes more than physical change. In spite of the fact that there are certain highly respectable individualists of a rabid type who prefer to call themselves Anarchists, it must be owned that it requires some courage to write about Anarchism even with the sympathy befitting a clinical physician or the scientific detachment of a pathologist. And yet it is certain that Anarchists are curiously interesting, and not the less in need of observation from the fact that apparently none of the social quacks who prescribe seriously in leading articles has the faintest insight into them as a phenomenon, a portent, or a disease. This book, if it is read with understanding, will, I feel assured, do not a little to show how it comes about that Anarchism is as truly endemic in Western Civilisations as cholera is in India. Isabel Meredith, whom I had the pleasure of knowing when she was a more humble member of the staff of the Tocsin than the editor, occupies, to my knowledge, a very curious and unique position in the history of English Anarchism. There is nothing whatever in “A Girl among the Anarchists” which is invented, the whole thing is an experience told very simply, but I think convincingly. Nevertheless as such a human document must seem incredible to the ordinary reader, I have no little pleasure in saying that I know what she has written to be true. I was myself a contributor to the paper which is here known as the Tocsin . I have handled the press and have discussed details (which did not include bombs) with the editor. I knew “Kosinski” and still have an admiration for “Nekrovitch.” And even now I do not mind avowing that I am philosophically as much an Anarchist as the late Dr. H. G. Sutton, who would no doubt have been astounded to learn that he belonged to the brotherhood. Curiously enough I have found most Anarchists of the mildest dispositions. I have met meek Germans (there are meek Germans still extant) who even in their wildest Anarchic indignation seemed as little capable of hurting a living soul as of setting the Elbe on fire. For it must be understood that the “red wing” of the Anarchists is a very small section of the body of philosophers known as Anarchists. There is no doubt that those of the dynamite section are practically insane. They are “impulsives”; they were outraged and they revolted before birth. Most of the proletariat take their thrashing lying down. There are some who cannot do that. It is out of these who are not meek and do not inherit even standing-room on the earth that such as “Matthieu” comes. Perhaps it may not be out of place to suggest that a …
