---
title: "Definition of Terms"
author: "CrimethInc."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-definition-of-terms"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 7th November 2020 from crimethinc.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "crimethinc-definition-of-terms.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-definition-of-terms.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abundance: All of us can be rich…        Scarcity: … not all of us can be wealthy.        Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness        Survival, Safety, and the Pursuit of Property        Play: Head for horizons…        Work … not destinations.        Gift Economics: We know everything is priceless.        Exchange Economies: They say everything has a price.        Relationships of Love: Cooperation…        Relationships of Force … or Coercion?        Faith: Invest in the future…        Fear … or protect yourself to death. In a totalitarian regime (whether it be political, like the Stalinist government of the Soviet Union, or socio-economic, like the corporate capitalism of our day), in which the whole of human relations is regulated, fragmentary resistance to any one aspect of that regime — environmental destruction, police brutality, child abuse, racism, employee ennui — can only fail. The totality itself must be contested, the basic paradigms as well as their specific manifestations… not in order to impose another totalitarian order, but to open new horizons for everyone. For this, a resistance is needed which does not standardize those who participate in it, in which individuals can help each other to break free in the process of creating and exploring themselves. This sketch of six oppositions is not meant as a complete map of the world of human relations, but rather as a selection of tools for the woman or man engaged in her own analysis. — Nadia C. We move in spiral paths, imploding or expanding, relinquishing the world to become what we hate, or finding the faith to discover new worlds and loves. Alchemy is the process by which one moves from the vicious inner circle outwards… Abundance and scarcity are not just measurements of the resources which exist to meet one’s needs — they are different ways of regarding both the resources and the needs themselves… which become reflected in the world. Abundant resources exceed the need for them; they may even multiply when utilized. Most of the things which set life apart from survival — love, friendship, confidence, imagination, courage, adventure, experience — are available in abundance: the more you partake of them, the more they are available to you and everyone else as well. Scarce resources, on the other hand, exist in limited supply, and there may simply not be enough to go around. A scarcity economy is driven by the considerations necessitated by those conditions: in it, the “laws” of supply and demand are imposed first of all by a shortage, real or perceived, of needed goods. It might seem that scarcity is simply an inescapable fact of life, but it’s not that simple. Not all scarcities are imposed by circumstances — often, we impose them upon ourselves by the ways we assess and apply our assets. In our technologically advanced, post-industrial civilization, tools and amenities which were unheard of before are plentiful, yet most of us distinctly feel there to be a shortage of the things we need. This should not be surprising, for our social and economic systems depend on there not being enough for everybody. Everyone can have a full life — but not everyone can have a full wallet. Our society institutes scarcity and deprivation, by framing life as a desperate rush for limited material wealth and status. They say the only free men are the hobo and the king. They are indeed the only ones who can claim to be lords of all they survey — though for utterly different reasons: the former possesses the entire world by releasing it, while the latter still owns only what he can conquer. Here we can see the paradigms of abundance and scarcity in action as philosophies of life. Likewise, the scavenger who thrives off the excess of his society sees opportunity and adventure where the executive sees only hunger and destitution; the non-monogamous lover sees love as something that only increases in richness and depth by being shared freely, while the possessive husband rega…
