---
title: "Citizens’ Money"
author: "Henry Replogle, Georgia Replogle, Alfred B. Westrup"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfred-b-westrup-citizens-money"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Critical Analysis in the Light of Free Trade in Banking"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alfred-b-westrup-citizens-money.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alfred-b-westrup-citizens-money.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       INTRODUCTORY BY THE FORMER PUBLISHER.        PRELIMINARY REMARKS.        APPENDIX: THE MUTUAL BANK PROPAGANDA.          MUTUAL BANK PROPAGANDA.          PLAN FOR A MUTUAL BANK. In no popular idea does the unevoluted tail protrude farther from beneath the covering of civilization than in that regarding money, and in no case does the donkey faculty of following a beaten path more seriously injure the material welfare of all than in this. Gold and silver were malleable, glittering, and scarce, therefore to the savage mind of primitive man they were more desirable and precious than any of the few things he possessed and were in that degree more exchangeable. The glitter, that which because of its loudness holds the attention of the infant mind, naturally constituted its greatest desirability, and is almost the only use it would have to-day but for this primitive fancy growing into a “time-honored” superstition which gave these metals the monopoly of our medium of exchange. On this crude, frog faculty, the love of glitter, then, is based the popular idea of the only means by which we may effect an exchange of the products of our multitudinous division of labor. This childish fancy, through the brute force of political authority, has posited the average intelligence of this age as maintaining that all kinds of property must be exchanged for one particular kind before its value can be had in some other kind different from it and also from this peculiar kind for which the original was exchanged; this must be done whatever be the cost of this particular kind. If an individual wishes to use his property as security for a fractional mortgage to obtain credit of various amounts among his neighbors or others, he must first resolve it into this one kind of property, no matter how much more of the original property is required to procure a sufficient amount of the needed credit, nor how willing his friends he to receive his original security instead. There is no escape, he must use this particular kind or be deprived of capitalizing in exchangeable form the unconsumed product of his labor. All this is due to a “representative” tyranny which prohibits the use of such fractional mortgage by imposing a tax of ten per cent on any currency not secured by the peculiar metallic property, which necessarily gives the holders of this favored kind a monopoly over all exchange, and with which they may tax industry as near the verge of extinction as they may desire, and thus absorb all other kinds of property without any exertion save that of keeping this monopoly intact. That this is the case we have but to look around us to see. The remedy lies in the abolition of this monopoly, and the adoption of something like the credit or money system set forth in the following pages by Alfred B. Westrup, in a lecture delivered in Chicago in reply to a defense of the National. Banking System by Banker Lyman J. Gage. This lecture was printed in “Liberty,” of Boston, in 1888, under the title,” The National Banking System,” from which journal it is reprinted in this pamphlet. It is the most popular exposition of the subject in a short space of which the publishers know, and as it is next to impossible to get an indifferent public to read economic literature at all, it is believed that this short treatise, printed in large type, will be more attractive to beginners than the longer ones and lead them to read all the excellent matter on the subject of Free or Mutual Money. Among this is “Mutual Banking,” by William B. Greene; “A New System of Banking,” by Lysander Spooner, and “The Principles of Monetary Science,” by the author of this lecture. In denying the claims of the National Banking System as the best means for furnishing an exchange medium, Mr. Westrup has affirmed another system which the publishers are interested in propagating, and, in order to give it the positive form, have taken the liberty to publish it under the title of CITIZEN’S MONEY—a money wh…
