---
title: "The Europe of repression strikes a blow at social protest in Ireland"
author: "Jose Antonio Gutiérrez Danton"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-the-europe-of-repression-strikes-a-blow-at-social-protest-in-ireland"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translation by John Catalinotto Retrieved on 22nd December 2021 from www.anarkismo.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-the-europe-of-repression-strikes-a-blow-at-social-protest-in-ireland.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-the-europe-of-repression-strikes-a-blow-at-social-protest-in-ireland.epub"
    hosted: false
---

After years of shamelessly plundering the country, the rich have turned their private debts into public ones and have imposed a program of austerity on its people so that the poorest have the burden of keeping the ship afloat. Not content with this, the foreign partners of this oligarchy, the same ones that permitted them to indebt themselves at astronomical levels and finance their extravagances, are using the crisis to guarantee success for their businesses: that debts are paid with its interest due and that the economy is opened up to them for new investment opportunities. This has begun with the privatisation of basic services, with the domestic oligarchy becoming the commercial agency that administers the pillaging. When the people began to protest against this scandal, raids took place before dawn that hauled political activists from their homes to interrogate them, intimidate them and hand out draconian sentences against some of them. The judicial system prohibits social protest and the authorities threaten that they won’t accept interruptions to “order”. We are not describing a small third-world republic of the late ‘70s, however this is what has been happening in recent weeks in the civilised and progressive European Union (EU). More particularly, in the banana republic of Ireland. Since 2008 the public has endured, with the stoicism bordering on stupidity, all of the conditions imposed by the troika (ECB, IMF, EU) in the midst of the crisis, the austerity programme, the lies of a government elected to do the exact opposite of what it has done, the taunts of some of the rich who have continued to be rich by looting the pockets of the working class. The legendary combative spirit of the Irish has evaporated without leaving a trace, to the point that the Greeks carry banners in their own protests stating “We are not Ireland”. But it has reached a point that even more than the most compliant Irish people have reached their limit. The privatisation of water was the drop that literally made the glass overflow. Even though they treat the privatisation of water with the argument that it is a necessary action due to the crisis, the truth is that for some time the EU has been pushing the privatisation of this said service in Ireland: in fact, there have been successive and successful campaigns against the conversion of this public right into a business since the late 1990s. Hundreds of thousands of people in this small country have been protesting against this policy and the government has encountered a campaign of civil disobedience without precedent, in which the majority of the population refuse to pay. Horror of horrors, GMC Sierra, the company charged with the installation of water-meters of German and North American origin, has met acrimonious opposition from communities that don’t allow them to install the meters, obstruct and block them from working. Direct action, ladies and gentlemen! This is what we are witnessing after decades of domestication of popular movements through the social pact. The ruling class is scared and you can see it. They fear anarchy, that the disobedient population refuses to recognise the authority of those who govern. They have reacted clumsily, ordering in one week the detention of 17 people who participated in a protest in November last year in the district of Jobstown. On this occasion the car of the Deputy Prime Minister, Labour’s Joan Burton, was blocked by the protesters, who were then shamelessly accused of “false imprisonement”. Included among the first group of detainees (February 9) was Socialist Party deputy Paul Murphy, left-wing councillors and republican activists. In the days that followed, those detained, who are all protestors in the campaign against the privatisation of water, including minors and pensioners, making this an even more grotesque production. Even though all were released provisionally yesterday the courts condemned five activists — Bernie Hughes, Damien O’Neill,…
