---
title: "The Blast Vol. I, No. 4"
author: "Luke North, Ed Gammons, Charles Erskine Scott Wood, Caroline Nelson, Alexander Berkman"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-the-blast-vol-i-no-4"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "San Francisco, Saturday, February 5, 1916"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexander-berkman-the-blast-vol-i-no-4.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-the-blast-vol-i-no-4.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       To the Workers        Why Revolutionary?        Life is Vision        The Power of the Press        Justice Defined        The Poor Man’s Taxi        Comments        The Schmidt Case—And Before        The Human Mass        For Young Folks        Meetings and Lectures Your kings and your countries need you, You, the sons of honest toil; But your countries have been stolen, You’re needed to guard the spoil. Flower of the nations’ manhood, They need you but a day; Mayhap, the morning’s sun will rise, On heaps of bleeding clay. I see the bloody pains of war Swept clear with shot and shell; Death’s scythe is sweeping quick and fast, Gape wide the jaws of hell. I hear the cannon’s roar, The cry of souls in anguish; And maimed and mangled, friend and foe, Are left to die and languish. O men, where does the honor lie, In deeds of foulest murder; To rob a mother of her son, Or children of their father. You build the ships, the ships of war, To dominate the foam; To guard the land you don’t possess, And your hovel, called a home. You build the lofty palace hall, You build the prison cell; You forge the fetters of the chain, To bind yourselves in hell. You toil and sweat, you spin and weave, You plow the fertile lands, Yet in the fruitful summer time, You stand with empty hands. Rememer this, the great are great, Whilst you, on knee, are bended; But stand and act and think like men, The tyrants’ day is ended. Many a gentle soul shrinks from the word revolution. They see in it naught but shedding of blood, and erroneously imagine the revolutionist a monster. Logistically they might as well revile the surgeon whose operation, bloody though it be, relieves human suffering, or the gardener with his pruning hook who lops off superfluous branches that the tree may grow. It is their very love of humanity or their hatred of tyranny which makes revolutionists in every land sacrifice social standing, liberty, life itself for the cause of human freedom. Revolutionists are the milestones on the road of progress. The nice, good, law-abiding muttonhead rapturously listens to the screech of the eagle on Fourth of July and cracks his elbow waving a piece of bunting on a stick, shouting “Hurrah, hurrah, for the flag that makes us free!” Next morning, likely as not, his freedom has a kink in it, and he dog-trots around from one shop to another begging the masters of the bread, “Please, mister, give me a job!” As for the flag making him free, he might as well have a rabbit’s foot in his pocket or a ring in his nose, for all the good it does him. The same with other nations. The Britisher swells with pride over the Magna Charta and over Cromwell’s revolution; the French celebrate the fall of the Bastile; the Italians jubilate over Garibaldi the Liberator and his red-shirted revolutionists. Revolutions are celebrated in every land by the most respectable conservatives as a matter of mere stupid tradition. Their historical interpretation is left to the social outlaw, the revolutionist of today. George Washington would have been hanged as a traitor had the British gotten hold of him. John Brown was hanged as traitor; still, his soul goes marching on. Not one American in a thousand knows the names of his judges. Cromwell and Garibaldi would have met John Brown’s fate had they failed. But what of those that have not succeeded? There are none: “They never die who fall In a great cause. The block may soak their gore, Their heads may rotten in the sun; their limbs Be strung to city gates and castle walls. But still their spirit walks abroad. Though years Elapse and others share as dark a doom, They but augment the deep and sweeping thought Which overpowers all others and turns the world At last to freedom.” In all history the ruling classes never surrendered an iota of their power except through force or fear. Nor did the masters ever cease encroaching upon the liberties of the people until the people revolted in self-defense. In self-defense the power over …
