---
title: "Book Review: “Harmful to Minors,” by Judith Levine"
author: "narcissus"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/narcissus-book-review-harmful-to-minors-by-judith-levine"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Why Did You Ask Me to Read This."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "narcissus-book-review-harmful-to-minors-by-judith-levine.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/narcissus-book-review-harmful-to-minors-by-judith-levine.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Short Version and the Long Version        Politics and Context of: John Money and “Sexual Rehearsal Play”        Tangent One: We Are Not Talking About The Same Thing        Levine’s Unexpectedly Reactionary “Science”        Politics and Context of: False Memory Syndrome        CSA Denialism as “Objective Neutral Science”        Politics and Context of: Bruce Rind        Tangent Two: “Boy”-Love?        Conclusions: This Review Was Originally Supposed to be One Paragraph Long This was supposed to be a one-paragraph blurb. Numerous times since I began talking about youth liberation, consent, and rape culture, friends and radicals have asked what I think of Judith Levine’s highly recommended book, Harmful to Minors: The Perils of Protecting Children From Sex . Until recently, I haven’t had either the time or the inclination to read it. This turns out to be for the best, because I went into the reading already armed with a significant (some might say, unhealthy) amount of research about the social and academic milieus of sexologists and activists from which Levine draws much of her evidence. I think for most people who read this book, the things that stand out to me will go entirely unnoticed. Levine presents a seemingly reasonable and measured, seemingly well-researched case. Many people who read it will be persuaded both of its good points and its bad points, and indeed the seamless blending of good and bad together goes a long way to obfuscate the seriousness of its flaws. And… oh boy. It is not good. It is bad. Short version: this commonly recommended book, written by a civil libertarian, combines a number of generally and genuinely good and insightful arguments (e.g., sex education makes young people safer, teens have a right to access sexual and reproductive healthcare, and so on) with a number of other, much more pernicious claims that on the whole tend to favor certain ideological frameworks that privilege the “rights” of adults to sexually access the bodies of adolescents and children at the expense of young people themselves, their autonomy, and their liberation. The cover design of the ebook edition is… a choice. Now the long version. The overall arc of Levine’s thesis is well-trodden ground in the year of our Lord 2023. For this reason, I won’t be spending much time retreading it — you can read this review by Liz Highleyman for a general idea of its themes and reception, especially in left and radical milieus — but instead I want to focus on Levine’s actual research : namely, the way she selects and frames scientific sources, and how she constructs a vision of “science” as an epistemic authority on the lives of children. And in no small part I want to explore the unspoken, but crucial background information about that “science,” its political context, social agenda, and how it reaches the conclusions she then draws on as evidence. Levine makes numerous claims (stated as facts) throughout Harmful to Minors that are based entirely on evidence drawn from widely criticized, often outright pseudoscientific research conducted by trans-antagonistic pedophilia-sympathetic sexologists — including some who are associated with the “Man-Boy Love” and “Pedophile Emancipation” movements, like Theo Sandfort, who is referenced numerous times. Someday I hope to be able to write something breaking down the serious methodological problems — from massaged data to outright fabrication — that are ubiquitous in the research produced by this academic milieu, (I do discuss a few of the characteristic problems with some of them below, but in nowhere near the detail they deserve). For now, you can find a reasonably thorough review of one of Sandfort’s “boy-love” studies in Sarah D. Goode’s Paedophiles in Society: Reflecting on Sexuality, Abuse, and Hope , (although I also have reservations about that book on a whole, Chapter 5 is currently the only published work breaking down Sandfort’s “Boy-Love” research in detail that I am aware of…
