---
title: "Forest and Factory"
author: "Nick Chavez, Phil A. Neel"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/phil-a-neel-and-nick-chavez-forest-and-factory"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Science and the Fiction of Communism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "phil-a-neel-and-nick-chavez-forest-and-factory.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/phil-a-neel-and-nick-chavez-forest-and-factory.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Tangibilities        The Fundamental Principles of Communism        Localities        Association and Deliberation        The Ecosystem of Industry        Planned and Planetary Limits        The Motor of History        Construction and Conclusion “Although the utopian does see the effects of present-day society (in fact Marx praises respectfully some of the masters of utopian thought), his error lies in deducing the shape of future society not from a concatenation of real processes that link the course of the past to that of the future, not from natural and social reality, but from his own head, from human reason. The utopian believes that the goal of society’s course must be contained in the victory of certain general principles that are innate in the human spirit.” — Amadeo Bordiga [1] It doesn’t matter where you move. You walk through echoes of the same room plastered the same off-white. There are the same coffee shops of wood and chrome. Your workplaces are warehouses, offices, construction sites. It doesn’t matter. All hollow boxes filled with shuffling people bleeding hope slow and dark as organ blood. The kind of trail left by hunted animals. Like any fleeing thing, we seek refuge where we can. You come home to the only basement or closet you can afford in this bright, damned city always built for someone richer—you are caked in that soft glitter of fiberglass from the worksite or wreathed in the soft ache of a day hunched over the desk, over the counter, over the beds of hospice patients wracked with the slow agony of a life ripping out of them like deep roots from loosened soil—and you saw something on one of the apps that seemed like a salve so you try it. You pull out some cheap projector and cast onto that off-white wall a video looped on repeat, the image of a window and beyond it rain pattering softly into the canopy of a verdant forest, the trees quivering with the terrible green flood of real life, the sound quivering out of your small speakers like real rain, and the sad solace quivering across your skin like a real feeling as you press your hand to the scene and feel nothing beneath but spackle on drywall, off-white. Today’s utopias are much the same. They are buried in the blue glow of screens that look like windows but are something less. We have seen breathtaking cathedrals built in Minecraft. We have wandered in melancholy worship through the “liminal spaces” of urbex vloggers and backrooms forums. We have felt the sublime warmth of Miyazaki and the solarpunk imageboard. Sometimes, we can even pretend that distant locales offer something more substantial: the Lacandon Jungle, Rojava, Cuba, even the Pyongyang of the propaganda poster (at that perfect aesthetic midpoint between Stalin and Wes Anderson). But for most of us these “real places” remain images, unmuddied by the murk and blood of material struggle. Like the soft blue glow, they are an intimate coldness. Cosplay, rather than politics. Closer to home, desperation even might push us to “envision real utopias” in any marginal glimmer of communality: the noble Wikipedia editor, the worker cooperative competing on the global market, the sharing of food at the protest camp, the persistence of the public library despite the endless assault of privatization, the urban garden tended by the six-figure NGO executive, the sharing of cigarettes near the dumpsters behind the kitchen, or simply the commonplace care work that knits us to family and friends. To imagine that such things are somehow the germ of communism would be a joke if it was not so tragic. Like someone who believes that the window projected onto the wall is the real thing. The bleak reality is that none of us have ever seen even the dimmest glimmer of a communist world—at most we have witnessed a few of those weightless moments when many people realize at once that our world can, in fact, be broken. Ultimately, these are nothing but glowing images best seen from a distance. Reach out to …
