---
title: "Autonomous Resistance"
author: "Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ejercito-zapatista-de-liberacion-nacional-autonomous-resistance"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First-Grade Textbook for the Course “Freedom according to the Zapatistas”"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ejercito-zapatista-de-liberacion-nacional-autonomous-resistance.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ejercito-zapatista-de-liberacion-nacional-autonomous-resistance.epub"
    hosted: false
---

   Caracol I: Mother of the Caracoles, Sea of Our Dreams      Economic Resistance        Marisol (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Pedro de Michoacán)        Roel (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Pedro de Michoacán)        Doroteo (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Libertad de los Pueblos Mayas)      Ideological Resistance        Anahí (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno)        Gabriel (Former Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ General Emiliano Zapata)      Psychological Resistance        Flor (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Libertad de los Pueblos Mayas)        William (Member of the Autonomous Municipal Council. MAREZ San Pedro de Michoacán)      Cultural Resistance        Lizbeth (Future Junta de Buen Gobierno Authority. MAREZ San Pedro Michoacán)        Nicodemo (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ General Emiliano Zapata)        Questions      Political Resistance        Marisol (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Pedro de Michoacán)        Roel (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Pedro Michoacán)      Social Resistance        Flor (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno)        William (Member of the Autonomous Municipal Council. MAREZ San Pedro de Michoacán)      Resistance to Military Presence        Anahí (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno)        Gabriel (Former Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ General Emiliano Zapatista)    Caracol II: Resistance and Rebellion For Humanity      Resistance to Military and Paramilitary Attacks        Emiliano (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Pedro Polhó)        Questions      Situation of the Displaced Persons In San Pedro Polhó        Aquileo (Member of the Municipal Council. MAREZ San Pedro Polhó)      The Evil Government’s Economic Attacks        Victor (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Juan Apóstol Cancuc)        Gonzalo (Former Judge. MAREZ San Andrés)        Another Compañero (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Juan Apóstol Cancuc)      Ideological Resistance        Bulmaro (Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ Magdalena de la Paz)        Questions      Cultural Resistance        Esmeralda (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Juan de la Libertad)        Moisés (Member of the Autonomous Council)    Caracol III: Resistance Toward A New Dawn      Autonomous Resistance        Roberto (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Ricardo Flores Magón)        Valentín (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno)        Another Compañero      Dismantling of the Autonomous Municipalities        Elena (Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ Ricardo Flores Magón)        Roberto (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Ricardo Flores Magón)        Gerardo (Zone Education Coordinator. MAREZ Francisco Villa)      Defense of Recovered Lands        Mauricio (Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ San Manuel)        Mateo (Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ San Manuel)      The Evil Government’s Ideology        Ramón (Zone Coordinator. MAREZ Ricardo Flores Magón)      Resistance in Autonomous Education and Health        Darinel (Zone Health Coordinator. MAREZ Francisco Villa)        Ramón (Zone Coordinator. MAREZ Ricardo Flores Magón)    Caracol IV: Whirlwind of Our Words      Introduction        Rosa Isabel (Support Base. MAREZ 17 de Noviembre)        Gerónimo (Former Member of Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Lucio Cabañas)      Ideological Resistance        Saulo (Former Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ 17 de Noviembre)        Gerónimo (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Lucio Cabañas)      Economic Resistance        Floribel (Former Member of the Autonomous Council. MAREZ Lucio Cabañas)        Questions      The Compañeras’ Work        Miriam        Gerónimo (Former Member of the Junta de Buen Gobierno. MAREZ Lucio Cabañas)      Cultu…
