---
title: "Burying the Anarchist Movement"
author: "Barut"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/barut-burying-the-anarchist-movement-barut-2021"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved from published zine"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "barut-burying-the-anarchist-movement-barut-2021.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/barut-burying-the-anarchist-movement-barut-2021.epub"
    hosted: false
---

“The bourgeois toads and the proletarian frogs clasped each other’s hands in a common spiritual baseness, piously receiving communion from the lead cup containing the slimy liquor of the very social lies that democracy handed to each of them.” — Renzo Novatore, Collected Works “The schizophrenic deliberately seeks out the very limit of capitalism: they are its inherent tendency brought to fulfillment, its surplus product, its proletariat, and its exterminating angel. They scramble all the codes and are the transmitter of the decoded flows of desire.” — Deleuze and Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia “Let’s get decadent! Filth is our politics! Filth is our life!” — Mary Nardini Gang, Towards The Queerest Insurrection With the knowledge of the non-existence of a united anarchist movement in the European continent, I want to talk about my observations about the anarchist scenes I have been in in the UK, Germany, and Turkey. Even with all their differences, they are always consistent on three things; a leftist obsession with “real” democracy, intra-communal ideological conformity and self sacrifice to the death cult of progress. This is not an in-depth critique of their practices and ideologies, many before me have done that effectively. Mine is the nihilist scream into the dark night from the belly of western civilization. An explosion of boiling shit from the sewers against industrially sanitised minds, against the protectors of society and its values, and against the cult of the collective. First, we take Turkey. Anarchist thought first appeared in Turkey in the 1980s through the anarchist publication “Karala”, about 100 years too late discounting the handful of Italian and Jewish anarchists that lived in Istanbul during the Ottoman Empire. When anarchism did arrive in Turkey, it was in the form of pacifist anarchism. After 40 years, the anarchism in Turkey has remained what it was when it first arrived, a subcultural and aesthetic outlet that remained to be nothing more than magazine and newspaper publications. Not even a wolf without fangs, but more like a pug whose own fart scares itself. An anarchist friend of mine calls me and invites me to lunch near Taksim Square in Istanbul. We sit outside of a café in a small alleyway and catch up. He reveals to me that he left the DAF (Revolutionary Anarchist Action) because he was being ostracised for questioning the founder of the group and not conforming to the group line. Something here is very odd isn’t it? An anarchist organisation that seems to operate more like a Marxist-Leninist vanguard party. He also tells me that the founder of the group had set unspoken rules that everyone dresses the same during the protests and nothing that could be subversive to the eye and values of the general public. Need to see this shit show for myself. I show up at the next planned protest that DAF is also participating in to see it with my own eyes, and there they are with their black flags in a clearly practiced formation and dressed in their anarchist uniforms — all black with a vest with the anarchist A and the DAF logo. The black is clearly not meant to form a black bloc but to form an aesthetic and symbolic presence that at this point goes no more beyond virtue signalling. After some marching and chanting of slogans that appeal to the collective unity instinct of these black sheep, the police started attacking and arresting DAF members and others. Unsurprisingly, they didn’t fight back, nor did they try to free their so-called comrades from the hands of the pigs. Useless hobby anarchists who are only good for reading groups and running hipster anarchist coffee shops, what could you expect of them? Would it even be desirable to have a strong anarchist “movement” anyway? My observations in the anarchist scene in Turkey could not have been further away from my own understanding of an anarchy that is dangerous, nihilist, queer, individualist, feral, and relentless in its attack…
