---
title: "Absolute Typhos"
author: "Alejandro de Acosta"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alejandro-de-acosta-absolute-typhos"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in 2015 (How to Live Now or Never, LBC Books) Retrieved on 13th August 2021 from printedbybugs.com and archive.org."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alejandro-de-acosta-absolute-typhos.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alejandro-de-acosta-absolute-typhos.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1        2        3        4        5 This essay was written in late 2012 and early 2013. It has several layers. Most fundamentally it emerges from an old plan for serial essay-writing, in which each essay should defend an indefensible proposition. It is also a sequel to the previous essay on the Cynics , allowing a harsher perspective on the idea of Spectacle, which had appeared in a number of other texts I was working on at the time. Finally, it was written in mind of the approach taken in the Sovereign Self pieces—it certainly recollects their voice—and was intended for publication in a follow-up of sorts to that newspaper which has yet to appear. In a book on the ancient Greek Cynic philosophers I reviewed for the Anvil two years ago, I noted with interest the Cynics’ use of the term typhos . This word, which in ordinary usage meant smoke or vapor , was used by them “to denote the delirium of popular ideas and conventions.” [1] The author of the book adds: For the Cynics, these are insubstantial ‘smoke’ in comparison with the self and its present experiences, which alone can be known and possessed. One Cynic goal is atyphia , complete freedom from typhos . The idea seems to have been one of mental obnubilation. In some provocations at the end of the review, I asked: What is typhos to you? I think of this as a promising alternative to terms such as ideology or spectacle . Rather than deploying a true-false, reality-appearance dichotomy (the starting point of so many boring conversations), to me typhos suggests an intimate, personal, singular limit. It is the limit of my interest in the world, in the ideas and experiences of others, and in some of my own ideas and experiences as well. Beyond this limit, I can make a habit of thinking, all is smoke, vapor, typhos. [2] This essay answers the question what is typhos? along the egoist path already implicit in the asking. The last paragraph in the book on the Cynics includes the author’s appraisal of a contemporary interpreter, Navia: Ancient Cynicism is not for Navia an object of “scientific” curiosity only. It is important for him as the closest approximation to the true ethical philosophy, and the salutary outlook that we in our technological culture now need most. One idea that surfaces regularly in Navia’s work is the fear that contemporary human beings have become too dependent on a system that creates and then panders to unnecessary desires and that increasingly establishes itself as the sole reality. Worse, this system of endless acquisition and consumption harbours terrible violence both to the natural environment whose dwindling resources support it, and to human beings who are progressively dehumanized, continuously pumped with ideas, beliefs and desires from the outside, and blinded by the swirling typhos of media images, advertisements, plastic celebrities and political cant. The only solution is to wage “war” on this system, like an Antisthenes or Diogenes, and thus not in the spirit of mere renunciation. For Navia, the true Cynic criticizes out of a deep moral idealism, and the interpretation of ancient Cynicism as wholly negative is itself a sad reflection on our own moral impoverishment. We have, Navia argues through his scholarship, taken too little thought of the wisdom of the ancient Cynics: live simply, scorn unnecessary desires, do not follow the slavish crowd but speak the truth clearly in righteous war against untruth and, most of all, cultivate the virtue of philanthropia and learn to love others now, for it is from this that everything else will follow. It is only with respect to the last two of these sentences that I will deviate from this diagnosis. And my deviation might mark the specifically egoist appropriation of this idea, which opens out soon enough onto the appropriation of a more well-known set of concepts. Unlike the Cynic as imagined in this passage , the egoist sometimes does not seem righteous. It is difficult, if not impossible, to …
