---
title: "Battlespace Ukraine"
author: "Dmitry Mrachnik"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dmitry-mrachnik-battlespace-ukraine"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A manifesto against fascism and human duplicity"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "dmitry-mrachnik-battlespace-ukraine.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dmitry-mrachnik-battlespace-ukraine.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The worst has happened. Eight years of the frozen Russian invasion into Ukraine culminated in an explosion: hundreds of thousands of soldiers from the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation stormed the entire border of Ukraine with Russia, and most of the border with Belarus. Vladimir Putin is secluding himself in complete informational and ideological isolation, so his demands from the Ukrainian leadership are ultimately senseless. The Russian armed forces have strong artillery, rockets, and aviation but utterly fail when clashing with the Ukrainians directly; entire Russian units surrender or scatter and run in hopes of returning home. Russian armored vehicles and the corpses of the invaders are scattered all over our country. The Putin regime could not care less about the lives of its own military. Unable to prevail over the Ukrainians on the ground or to force the government into any concessions, the Russians are shooting civilians and ruining cities. In occupied settlements, they’re harassing locals in plain sight, murdering, robbing, raping and getting drunk. The occupiers are confused, scared and desperate; they have no motivation other than to pillage or to save their miserable lives. The soldiers of Russia are unlikely to believe in their own war mythologies as deeply as their TV-watching compatriots; they just want it all to end as soon as possible. They also want to carry home the trophies they have stolen from civilians: cars, appliances, gadgets, clothes, vodka bottles and even homemade jars of pickled vegetables. Right now, Russia is nothing less than a fascist regime that has overtaken their administrative system, as well as their ideology. The statements by their government propagandists are an exact replica of what Joseph Goebbles had his Third Reich ministry produce; in some ways modern Russian ideology seems to have photocopied the Nazi field guides of the late ’30s. This preposterous mess nests inside hundreds of thousands of soldiers, vehicles, rockets, attack planes, and nuclear bombs. The entire world is cutting its economic and cultural partnerships with Russia. The Russian national currency has lost value, their supermarket shelves are suddenly empty, and their people are unemployed. The brightest heads of Russia are hurrying to escape their borders, having zero hope for a Russian revolution, as Putin still holds total control despite the economic sanctions and exceptional military losses. The Russian police are persecuting, beating up and torturing people, and the Russian bourgeoisie — the fundament of the Putin regime — has absolutely no idea what to do with this. Months of hunger, unemployment and social depression will have passed before the government machine loses its first cogs. Before that happens, thousands of Ukrainian soldiers will have died, as well as hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian civilians, including children. The enemy has no compassion, no conscience and no decency; the Russians will gladly commit any war crime that makes their unattainable mirage of victory appear any closer. Russia will not stop bombing Ukraine with tin cans of human minced meat until they run out of oil to deliver another batch of predestined corpses to their combat positions. Their soldiers will fight in the cold, lacking food and water, as long as they have ammunition and armaments. In this horrible time, Ukrainians are not only displaying their courage and self-sacrifice, but also an incredible degree of all other human virtues. Whatever the ethnic background, belief system, social status, and/or language any of us have, we have united around our common ideal of freedom and justice, and our shared hatred of inimical ideas. We do not strive for victory because of an obsession with dominance. We aren’t looking for a king. None of us rejoice in sadist degradations. We cannot stand aside any longer, and neither will our sisters and brothers remain voiceless migrant workers. Ukraine has suffered enough, and it is …
