---
title: "101 Notes on the LA Tenants Union"
author: "Tracy Jeanne Rosenthal"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tracy-jeanne-rosenthal-101-notes-on-the-la-tenants-union"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "You can’t do politics alone."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tracy-jeanne-rosenthal-101-notes-on-the-la-tenants-union.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tracy-jeanne-rosenthal-101-notes-on-the-la-tenants-union.epub"
    hosted: false
---

First of all, there is no housing crisis. Housing is not in crisis. Housing needs no trauma counselors. Housing needs no lawyers. Housing needs no comrades or friends. Housing needs no representatives. Housing needs no organizers. When we call this crisis a housing crisis, it benefits the people who design housing, who build housing, who profit from housing, not the people who live in it. It encourages us to think in abstractions, in numbers, in interchangeable “units,” and not about people, or about power. We don’t have a housing crisis. We have a tenants’ rights crisis. In the LA Tenants Union, the subject of our work is not housing. It’s the tenant. A tenant can be harassed, evicted, displaced, broke, undocumented, fed up, or organized. A tenant can be in kindergarten, can be a teacher, or a teacher on strike. A tenant can be incarcerated or houseless. In LATU we define a tenant as more than a renter. A tenant is anyone who doesn’t control their own housing. In LATU, we frame our work around humans, not housing. Humans, unlike housing, have race, gender, families, history. Humans, unlike housing, have power. We started LATU in 2015, with a single meeting in Hollywood. We have since expanded to ten local chapters, which meet twice a month across the city, and have now organized dozens of tenants’ associations, some with hundreds of members. LATU is a member-funded union. We are not a non-profit. We receive no funding except from dues, which average five dollars a month. We are an all-volunteer effort. This is how we got started: In 2012, School of Echoes, a group of people, diverse in age, race, and organizing experience, figured out that what we all had in common was living in neighborhoods undergoing a process often euphemized as “change.” The abstraction of this process allowed some to call it natural, inevitable, and even: good. I’m talking about gentrification, whose definition in 2012 seemed to be written by the people it benefited. Together, School of Echoes wanted to redefine gentrification not as a natural process, but as—to use Ursula K. Le Guinn’s phrase—a “human power,” produced by humans, by actors, agents, and targets. So, we spent a few years listening: to STAY in Echo Park, where a gang injunction meant youth of color could be jailed just for sitting together outside; to residents of Frogtown, where a new public park arrived right after half of neighborhood properties had changed hands in three years; to Needle Exchange in Hollywood, whose outreach operations had to keep up with stepped up encampment sweeps; to Union de Vecinos, who fought against Clinton’s Hope VI, which meant the demolition of more than nine hundred public apartments from Boyle Heights. We heard: city governments expanding their tax bases not their services, nonprofits negotiating the terms of defeat, lawyers offering individualistic advice, and tenants who didn’t know their rights and thought there was nothing they could do. We came to understand gentrification as purposeful and produced. We defined gentrification as “displacement and replacement of the poor for profit.” But we didn’t just want to analyze gentrification, we wanted to stop it. We recognized that the solidarity amongst gentrification’s beneficiaries—the police, landlords, developers, government representatives of the real estate state—meant we needed to build equal solidarity for ourselves. In other words, we knew we couldn’t fight gentrification alone. Focusing our work on tenants rather than housing, becoming tenant organizers not housing activists, has fundamentally shaped our participants, our strategies, and our goals. We asked: In a city where more than half of Los Angeles speaks a language other than English at home, how will we build solidarity across language differences? We asked: Gentrification most impacts the most vulnerable in our city, so how do we make the most vulnerable the most powerful in our movement? We asked: How do we respect tenants by treating them …
