---
title: "Finding Joy in Queer Activism"
author: "Zac Larkham"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/zac-larkham-finding-joy-in-queer-activism-an-autoethnography"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Autoethnography"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "zac-larkham-finding-joy-in-queer-activism-an-autoethnography.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/zac-larkham-finding-joy-in-queer-activism-an-autoethnography.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Acknowledgements        Abstract        Introduction        Methodology        A note on ‘queer’        Literature Review        Care        Anti-Hierarchy        Discussion and Conclusion        References I would like to thank the Sheffield Hallam UCU branch, particularly Bob Jeffrey, who was there for me when the rest of the university was not and without him, I may not have finished this degree. I would also like to thank my supervisor, Carissa Honeywell, for her advice and enthusiasm for this research, every activist I’ve met and worked with over the last three and a half years for everything they’ve taught me and my parents for endless support. Finally, a special thank you to the recent Vice-Chancellor of Sheffield Hallam University Professor Sir Chris Husbands for being such a loathsome human being and standing for everything I hate about universities. Paraphrasing Hunter S. Thompson’s obituary of Richard Nixon Sheffield Action Group wrote in a zine (also available on the Anarchist Library, search for Troublemakers 1 (February 2024)) recently: “Some of my best friends have hated Husbands, even the ones at other universities. My lecturers and their colleagues around the country who’ve been subjected to TEF hate Husbands, former SU officers hate Husbands, fellow students (that are aware of him) hate Husbands, I hate Husbands, and this hatred has brought us together.” Without him, I would certainly have a lot less to protest and write about. This Autoethnography explores the contemporary UK student movement and how the high proportion of queer activists in the movement can change how groups organise. I look at The Group, a student activist group at an unnamed university, and analyse my experiences and observations from organising with them in two chapters focused on cultures of care and practices of hierarchy. I look at this through critiques of neoliberalism and its resulting consciousness deflation and the framework provided by Joyful Militancy (bergman & Montgomery, 2017) which points a route out of neoliberalism, arguing strong relationships and bonds between activists can help create new strategies and methods of organising. By reflecting on The Group’s internal culture, I found a culture of care imbedded which allows the fluid forms of organising, attentive to the needs of the group at that present conjuncture, bergman and Montgomery outline. In Ghosts of My Life (2014), Mark Fisher argues that in the UK, the post-war welfare state created conditions for, “most of the experiments in popular culture between the 1960s and the 80s” (p.13). Cheap or squatted property, student maintenance grants and the fruits of a welfare state widely accessible for the first time helped create an “efflorescence of cultural invention” (p.13). The same conditions that nurtured this blossoming of culture also nurtured experiments in politics. Historically, bohemia and revolutionary movements are often drawn from the same demographics and coexisted side by side (Graeber, 2009, p. 253). It should be no surprise then, that this same period saw a spate of decolonial, black power, feminist, queer, New Left and countercultural movements emerge. Since then, however, progress in both revolutionary politics and culture has stagnated. The reformulation of power following the sixties – neoliberalism – is best understood as an “exorcising of ‘the spectre of a world which could be free… a project aimed at destroying — to the point of making them unthinkable — the experiments in democratic socialism and libertarian communism.” (Fisher, 2018a, p. 674). Berardi (2011) argued neoliberalisation in the seventies and eighties created the “slow cancellation of the future” (p. 13), explaining the intensity and precarity of work in late capitalism leaves us in a simultaneously exhausted and overstimulated state that prevents us from creating anything new. Neoliberalism has since expanded to encompass most of the globe and this neoliberal hegemony works to…
