---
title: "Anarchy in Iceland?"
author: "Viktor Orri Valgarðsson, Silja Bára Ómarsdóttir"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/silja-bara-omarsdottir-and-viktor-orri-valgardsson-anarchy-in-iceland"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The global left, pirates and socialists in post-crash Icelandic politics"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "silja-bara-omarsdottir-and-viktor-orri-valgardsson-anarchy-in-iceland.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/silja-bara-omarsdottir-and-viktor-orri-valgardsson-anarchy-in-iceland.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Introduction        The Left Green Movement        The crash and new political parties        The Pirate Party        Socialists and anarchists in Iceland: an uneasy alliance        Conclusion        References The historically stable Icelandic political party system has been uprooted since the 2008 financial crisis. In this paper, we explore to what extent the global left movement of anarchists and socialists has manifested in Icelandic politics in this period. We provide a historical overview, starting with the 2008 financial crisis which brought to power the first entirely left-wing government in the country’s history, but also gave birth to numerous new political parties that alternately united and divided socialists, anarchists and reformers. The Pirate Party spearheaded this movement from the 2013 elections, but internal disputes have plagued the party in recent years, and both they and the Left Greens now have a fresh challenge from the left: the Socialist Party. We conclude that the current prospects for a united uprising of these movements are dim, although history suggests that they can work together when focusing on common goals of political reform. Keywords: Iceland; Left Green Movement; Pirate party; anarchism; socialism; global left Since before the dawn of the Republic of Iceland in 1944, and into the twenty-first century, the country’s political party system was remarkably stable, consisting of four major parties that were entirely dominant: a bourgeois conservative party (the Independence Party); a farmers’ party (the Progressive Party); a social democratic party; and a socialist party. Various fifth, smaller parties sometimes entered parliament, but of these, only the Women’s List (from 1983–1999) and the Liberal Party (1999–2009) lasted longer than one term (Harðarson, 2006). This all changed with the financial crash in 2008. While many new parties ran, only one new party – the Civic Movement (CM) – entered parliament in 2009. At that time, an entirely left-wing government gained power for the first time in the country’s history. The Left Green Movement also entered government for the first time, taking on unique challenges that brought the left to its knees. At the end of their term, the Left Greens were facing an identity crisis. Until 2009, the party had been relatively radical and marginal in the Icelandic political scene. Its predecessor, the People’s Alliance (Alþýðubandalagið), had also been a small party, and had last been in government in 1991. After only four years in government, the Left Greens were now perceived as part of the establishment. The party lost a lot of support in the 2013 elections, entered opposition again and remained there despite a solid electoral performance in 2016. In 2017, however, the Left Greens formed a coalition government with the conservatives, further challenging the party’s identity as a radical left-wing party. A new tradition of protests also grew out of the crash. Various protest movements consolidated themselves through multiple new political parties, with 15 parties in total running in the 2013 elections. Some of these parties had clear anarchist and Marxist/socialist strands, and arguably started taking up the radical left of the political landscape. The Pirate Party, in particular, gained strong representation in parliament in 2016, and gradually shifted more towards the left. In 2017, however, both the Pirate Party and the Left Green Movement were challenged from the left in the form of the Socialist Party, which earned a seat in the Reykjavík City Council in 2018. In this paper, we analyse these developments from our perspective as two academics who have been active in these developments; one for the Left Green Movement and the other for the Movement and the Pirate Party in the aftermath of the crash. The paper is partly structured as a sort of dialogue between these different perspectives, starting with sections focused on each party i…
