---
title: "Byzantinism and Limpness"
author: "Michel Antoine"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/michel-antoine-byzantinism-and-limpness"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Article published by Michel Antoine (under the pseudonym ‘LEVIEUX’ (‘THEOLD’) here) in 1909 in L’Anarchie. Antoine wrote for this newspaper dozens of times – he generally defended European individualist anarchism and illegalism there. Here, one of his texts is part of his polemics with Jean Grave, t"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "michel-antoine-byzantinism-and-limpness.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/michel-antoine-byzantinism-and-limpness.epub"
    hosted: false
---

At the moment, as in all transition eras, a common phenomenon occurs among anarchists. The revision of social values implied by the anarchist idea doesn’t come without some misinterpretations. The meaning of words and ideas is affected. Everyone interprets them according to their tendencies or interests without considering their logical coherence. One can’t ask a simple and clear question or make it public or debate it without a shadowy and convoluted casuistry coming to obscure and muddle it endlessly. Ideas are reduced and belittled to the level of the current social necessities or the conventional interests of each individual. Every clear and strong thought is immediately suffocated by their idiotic objections, their bullshit contestations, their vile hypotheses, their perfidious insinuations. The ‘buts’, the ‘ifs’, the ‘becauses’ rain like the flood and the rising tide of stupidity and cowardness threatens to drown the whole logic. They try to discuss questions through their most childish aspects. Thus, endlessly, they turn in the vicious and void circle of subtilities. There, everything is only talk. This mindset bogs down every truth, stops every decision, paralyzes every energy, annihilates every action, and corrupts us to the point of making us as impotent as Byzantium’s eunuchs. How can we explain this stagnation and this chaos ? Simply by the inherent misoneism in every man, in every being, in varying proportions. The absolute rupture of habits, ways of perceiving, thinking, feeling, acting, living, is always frightening. The most ferocious revolutionary never dares to follow his thought until its end. As for the timid, whose theoretical ambition is not very great to begin with, their effective courage disappears in face of the smallest praxis, and their theories, already limp, become even more so. They look around and find themselves reasons to justify their inertia and even magnify it, so great is the tendency in men to transform their weaknesses into virtues. In reality, our revolutionaries don’t like new things. Philoneism, only apparent, only stays skin-deep. Inside them, they are timid ; they are afraid by the deed. A comrade wrote here a very exaggerated article about the exaggerations of the anarchists. Where are those exaggerations ? Most anarchists are content to say and profess ideas that they never practice. Hardly one among them tries to live his thought. If there is an exageration, it’s rather in the discrepancy between ideas and acts. As long as it’s a matter of writing and speaking, painting the colours of a future paradise that nobody has ever seen and will never see — because future can only be seen in present — as long as they have to enumerate the probable felicities of this paradise, draw blueprints and build the systems that have to permit to conquer it ; everything is fine. However, when it is needed to establish this paradise, right now, with the avalaible elements, or to take it as it is, by hand, even if it means improving it later — as we have always done — there is nobody left. Pontiffs of moderantism, bureaucrats, stays-at-home, ankylosed in body and spirit, for most of them, they don’t want to walk anymore. They cry out against theft, exploitation, illegalism, madness. They say to wait, again, wait forever. What do they wait for ? It has been thousands of years that this shit has been going on and all those who waited got nothing. They died waiting. All those who wait will have nothing either: they will die waiting. Thus, the truth is not there. Moderantists lie, not for our interests, but for theirs. We don’t have to believe them. We don’t have to wait because life doesn’t wait. We need to live. We need to live as fully, freely, and intensely as possible by all means. We need to live without waiting for moderantists’ permission ; they don’t want us to serve ourselves because they hope, secretly, to be the providers, the ones called to serve the others by serving themselves first. Above …
