---
title: "Democratic Confederalism"
author: "Abdullah Öcalan"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/abdullah-ocalan-democratic-confederalism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The word “Qwam” plural “Aqwam” can mean “people”, “nation”, or “tribe” depending on the context. The translator incorrectly translated, in reference to the kurdish people as a kurdish “state” when in reality Ocalan rejects the notion of a state — originally published by: Transmedia Publishing Ltd. –"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "abdullah-ocalan-democratic-confederalism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/abdullah-ocalan-democratic-confederalism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     I. Preface      II. The Nation-State        A. Basics          1. Nation-state and Power          2. The State and its Religious Roots          3. Bureaucracy and the Nation-State          4. Nation-State and Homogeneity          5. Nation-State and Society        B. Ideological Foundations of the Nation-State          1. Nationalism          2. Positivist Science          3. Sexism          4. Religiousness        C. The Kurds and the Nation-State      III. Democratic Confederalism        A. Participation and the Diversity of the Political Landscape        B. The Heritage of the Society and the Accumulation of Historical Knowledge        C. Ethics and Political Awareness        D. Democratic Confederalism and a Democratic Political System        E. Democratic Confederalism and Self-Defence        F. Democratic Confederalism Versus Strife for Hegemony        G. Democratic Confederate Structures at a Global scale        H. Conclusion      IV. Principles of Democratic Confederalism      V. Problems of the Peoples in the Middle East and Possible Ways to a Solution For more than thirty years the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) has been struggling for the legitimate rights of the Kurdish people. Our struggle, our fight for liberation turned the Kurdish question into an international issue which affected the entire Middle East and brought a solution of the Kurdish question within reach. When the PKK was formed in the 1970s the international ideological and political climate was characterized by the bipolar world of the Cold War and the conflict between the socialist and the capitalist camps. The PKK was inspired at that time by the rise of decolonialization movements all over the world. In this context we tried to find our own way in agreement with the particular situation in our homeland. The PKK never regarded the Kurdish question as a mere problem of ethnicity or nationhood. Rather, we believed, it was the project of liberating the society and democratizing it. These aims increasingly determined our actions since the 1990s. We also recognized a causal link between the Kurdish question and the global domination of the modern capitalist system. Without questioning and challenging this link a solution would not be possible. Otherwise we would only become involved in new dependencies. So far, with a view to issues of ethnicity and nationhood like the Kurdish question, which have their roots deep in history and at the foundations of society, there seemed to be only one viable. solution: the creation of a nation-state, which was the paradigm of the capitalist modernity at that time. We did not believe, however, that any ready-made political blueprints would be able to sustainably improve the situation of the people in the Middle East. Had it not been nationalism and nation-states which had created so many problems in the Middle East? Let us therefore take a closer look at the historical background of this paradigm and see whether we can map a solution that avoids the trap of nationalism and fits the situation of the Middle East better. With the sedentarization of people they began to form an idea of the area that they were living in, its extension and its boundaries, which were mostly determined by nature and features of the landscape. Clans and tribes that had settled in a certain area and lived there for a long period of time developed the notions of a common identity and of the homeland. The boundaries between what the tribes saw as their homelands were not yet borders. Commerce, culture or language were not restricted by the boundaries. Territorial borders remained flexible for a long time. Feudal structures prevailed almost everywhere and now and then dynastic monarchies or great multi-ethnic empires rose with continuously changing borders and many different languages and religious communities like the Roman Empire, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Ottoman Empire or the British Empire. They survived long periods of time and ma…
