---
title: "'The Position Of The Excluded'"
author: "Aragorn!, The Brilliant podcast, Andy Robinson"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/andy-robinson-the-brilliant-podcast-the-position-of-the-excluded"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Transcribed, annotated and printed in Return Fire vol.6 chap.8 (winter 2024-2025). To read the articles referenced throughout this text in [square brackets] or footnotes, PDFs of Return Fire and related publications can be read, downloaded and printed by visiting returnfire.noblogs.org or emailing r"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "andy-robinson-the-brilliant-podcast-the-position-of-the-excluded.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/andy-robinson-the-brilliant-podcast-the-position-of-the-excluded.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/andy-robinson-the-brilliant-podcast-the-position-of-the-excluded)

[ed. – An interview conducted in 2017 by The Brilliant podcast with Andy Robinson, which we've had pending to transcribe and publish ever since. The years that have passed since have only convinced us that it is vital to keep some of these experiences and histories alive and in circulation, especially for the generations joining us who have not sought out or been provided with veterans (however imperfect) of past cycles of struggle and survival, so as usual we’ve added various footnotes for further explanation if needed.

The meat of this conversation revolves around neo-liberal exclusion (also among anarchists), focusing on the affects of anxiety generated as a result, which we would agree with the Institute for Precarious Consciousness are an under-studied reason for lack of momentum in our spaces. Since it was conducted, we have seen ever more novel regimes of exclusion and selective inclusion play out to similar effect, not least during since the start of the COVID pandemic; see 'The Difference Between “Just Coping” & “Not Coping at All”'. First though, a word from another essay by Andy (‘Democracy vs Desire’) on the terms:

“ An insurgent understanding of inclusion and exclusion is distinct from the conventional meanings of these terms, although related to them in a complex way. The idea of social exclusion has become fashionable [as of 2005], mainly because of a double discursive trick used by the neo-liberal power-elites. Firstly, the issue of poverty is shifted out of the political mainstream by replacing it with exclusion. And secondly, this new “problem” is blamed on the victims of capitalist/industrial society, treating the excluded themselves as the problem. This occurs, ironically enough, at just the point where new forms of biopower [ed. – see Return Fire vol.5 pg47] are being imposed in such a way as to render exclusion harsher and more pervasive than ever. [...] Against this regime of intensifying control, Crisso and Odoteo rightly counterpose the “new barbarians” – those who are so radically exterior to current social forms that they do not even speak the language of these forms [ed. – see 'Something Different Than the Reflection of This World'], who can engage with these forms only as a threatening force emerging as if from outside.”

Since those words were written the technological means for exclusion have only become more refined and distributed; indeed, often self-administered. Take the New York group of anti-fascists who, around the time this was recorded, helped develop a YouTube plug-in for viewers of the streaming video site to more easily alert the authorities to fascistic or otherwise problematic content; an almost comically optimistic move when viewed from the vantage of 2025, as the proprietor of one of the largest social media platforms in the world (having opted to purge various anarchists instead) openly throws out Nazi salutes while the tech oligarchy line up to greet the incumbent US president, but even at the time a predictable contribution to the control architecture to be used against us all (see Calling It Terror). Would the calls from some on the Left to nationalise the alienation and friendship-commodification machine of Facebook have put us in a better position today in the rising authoritarianism had they been successful? What of the laid-bare illusion that liberal institutions cared enough about the readily-marketable identities they tried to commercialise our struggles into (see 'Identity Precedes Ideology') to actually defend them once the queerphobes and imperial revanchists feel free to let their colours fly ever-more-openly? Clearly, our struggle is elsewhere.

While exclusion is still a widening condition in general terms, justifications for explicit exclusion of marginalised groups are falling back to the more blatant chauvanism and xenophobia that neo-liberalism had previously preferred to operationalise more subtly. The trajectory mentioned during the interview has travelled much further along in terms of the near-half-century of a stable centrist consensus breaking down: it's no longer outliers like the first Trump campaign and Britain's exit from the European Union, but an international authoritarian populist surge in Austria, Italy, Hungary, Holland, Argentina, France, etc. “For decades,” wrote CrimethInc. after the 2024 US election, “liberals and conservatives have worked together to suppress grassroots movements seeking to address the problems created by neoliberal capitalism; this created a vacuum that the far-right has ultimately filled. In that regard, the Democrats paved the way for nationalism and fascism to succeed neoliberalism. Presumably, they assume that those will be less threatening to their privileges than the end of capitalism would be.”

Yet a little more attention is needed when discussing this “nationalism and fascism,” especially in the supposed dichotomy between fascism and democracy (see Return Fire vol.5 pg61), or indeed nationalism and 'globalism' (see Lies of the Land). “Democratic mechanisms still provide an important release mechanism that can pacify and incorporate resistance movements before they become revolutionary,” Peter Gelderloos tells us in 'Geopolitics for 2024' (one need think only of the anti-police uprising of 2020; see The Siege of the Third Precinct): “But in the US, Brazil, Hungary, Poland, and the UK, rightwing populist electoral victories have shown that actually, democracy is dangerous to power because it is not total bullshit. Up until now, electoral promises were all rubbish because no new political administration endangered the underlying economic policies of neoliberalism. The technocrats didn’t have to worry: their machine would keep humming along.

“ Even progressive electoral victories in Greece, Brazil, Argentina, and elsewhere let the capitalists know: nothing to worry about here. And the democratic states have proved capable of dismantling actually fascist movements like Golden Dawn in Greece before they proved too much of a threat. But the rightwing white populists like Trump, Bolsonaro, Orbán, and Johnson not only eroded the functionality of democratic governance, they also threatened the stability of the technocratic status quo, scaring the hell out of investors who had been living in a Candyland made just for them, and they burst the assumed durability of key political formations like the European Union or the US-European alliance.”

Today as in 2017, democracy – long capitalism's optimal environment – stands in crisis: but it is not clear that fascism will be capitalism's escape route, as it served in the early 20th Century. Rather, beneath the stew of general reactionary intellectual currents and street movements that are certainly on the boil, what seems to be the mode of operation for actual populist elites is something closer to the kind of crony-capitalism already normalised in large parts of the so-called Global South; translating into what Uri Gordon memorably characterised as “fascist rhetoric and kleptocratic practice,” or what we have termed the take-the-money-and-run approach to the problem of governance. In other words, this is the section of the elite with fewest bright ideas for how to save their own sinking system, even as they grasp the controls in more and more places (and 'progressives' fall in line).

But before turning in the discussion below to what more long-term projections might be, it's worth considering how the discussion during the interview of identity is present both in the reactionary and in the 'progressive' spheres; and how they converge. In April, the essay 'Cultural Identity, Class & Change' noted that “The populist, nationalist right play on people’s fear of change, particularly the rapid change that has characterised the period of globalised neo-liberalism that’s now coming to an end. In particular, they play on a fear of change that people feel they’ve absolutely no control over. Paradoxically, that fear of change is shared by pretty much everyone on this planet whose lives have been turned upside down by the adverse impact of globalised neo-liberalism. This ranges from the inhabitants of sub-Saharan Africa who in the face of increased desertification are forced to become refugees through to the inhabitants of the former mill towns of northern England who have seen the industries that used to provide them with a living exported to locations where workers can be more easily exploited.

“ Regardless of what may seem to be massive differences between the peoples involved, they have all been severely disadvantaged by a globalised neo-liberalism that puts profits way ahead of the needs of ordinary people. [...] It should not come as a surprise that some elements in the white working class component of those left behind are starting to become more receptive to the siren voices of the populist, nationalist right. This reactionary political tendency sees cultural identity as something that’s pretty much fixed and only changes and evolves slowly.” The author connects this with the way in which they say that, in embracing identity politics to the detriment of class politics (we would amend, shifting their exclusive identity politics of class into an exclusive identity politics of race/gender/sexuality/ability etc., but that's another topic...), the Left failed to keep such vital struggles connected to a broader horizon of liberation for all: and in which we are all transformed in the process, without losing our particularity. “The material and social interests of the working class as a whole have been largely subsumed by a politics of identity which the right have co-opted elements of to confer upon the white working class. A united response to the depredations of a failing globalised neo-liberalism becomes an impossibility to achieve as the populist right completes the process of fragmentation inadvertently started by some elements of the left. So when a section of the white working class feel they have been left behind and are powerless to influence the forces that are changing their lives, they will be receptive to those political elements who promise them stability, self respect and so on.”

Importantly, the author goes on to point out how this is not just unsoldidaristic but self-defeating: “While an embittered section of the white working class may well buy into the notion that their cultural identity is more or less fixed and has to be defended [ed. – see Lies of the Land], they fail to see how that has the potential to be turned against them. It cannot be overstated that the populist, nationalist right sees the white working class as something to be used for their own cynical ends. Which is why the notion of cultural identity as something that’s fixed being one that could also be applied to class differences always seems to get overlooked. Which is a surprise given the eugenicist literature that says class differences are more or less immutable and that if society is to ‘progress’, the lower classes should be ‘discouraged’ from ‘breeding’.

“ Traditional conservatives claim that cultures do not mix successfully and that different peoples are best left to get on with their own affairs. This stems from the assumption that culture is a relatively fixed characteristic of any given society and one that only evolves slowly. The same argument has been used by some conservatives to justify the continuance of class divisions, hence their making efforts to depict class as something that’s more or less immutable with only some being deemed capable of making an upward move out of their class. Obviously, it is a rare conservative who will explicitly state such open prejudice – most will choose a form of language that either implies or sows the seed of a notion in peoples’ minds that there’s a natural and unchanging aspect to class divisions. This Guardian report (12 May 2009) – ‘Don’t say I was wrong’ – cites an example of how these notions can be sown with this utterance from a former chief schools inspector, Chris Woodhead, on the issue of social class and life chances: “I think it would be unlikely that large numbers of grammar school kids would come from those disadvantaged areas - the genes are likely to be better if your parents are teachers, academics, lawyers, whatever. And the nurture is likely to be better.”

[…] We’re facing a future where technology and automation has the potential to destroy millions of jobs [ed. – in places, this future is already here: see 'An Opening']. […] With the ruling elites pondering on how to accommodate millions upon millions of people who have no useful role in the automated world they rule over, the notion that the poor are poor because of their chromosomes will be incredibly useful for them…”

This is, of course, where an anarchist proposal of self-creation and expansive rather than immutable identity (while, as we wrote in our introduction to Lies of the Land in this double-issue, not neglecting the particularity of culture) offers another horizon. (It's important to note however that automation has not so far led to a reduction of the human labour force on any global level, but rather – as a State necessity for social control – a corresponding expansion of other sectors with which to keep people productive; see Return Fire vol.5 pg9.) But, in the meantime, while for the first time since the birth of neo-liberalism the capitalist class does not have a consensus on how to operate, it is at precisely this juncture of the new technological impositions where the more intelligent and hence dangerous parts of the elites (the 'progressives') may find another solution; even potentially accommodated by the otherwise-rightwards lurch if necessary.

The same year as the below interview, the text 'Long Term Resistance: Fighting Trump & Liberal Co-option' stated that “robotics threaten the social contract by undermining the historic point of unity between the capitalist logic of accumulation and the statist logic of social control: control people and profit off of them by putting them to work. Any solution to that crisis would require bold interventions by the State approaching some kind of utopian yet corporate socialism (a prediction that was already made in 2009, that socialism would not result from the development of productive capacities, as Marx foretold [ed. – see Return Fire vol.5 pg11], but rather repressive capacities, once the State had the techniques to surveille and control those who were no longer kept in line by the threat of hunger) [ed. – see 'A New Relation with Social Conflicts'].

[…] The leftist (as opposed to anarchist or indigenous) portion of the anti-globalization movement made a similar error. Rather than spreading deep critiques of capitalism and the State, everyone from progressives to Negrists [ed. – see 'Our Anarchy Lives'] to anti-imperialists focused their attacks on neoliberalism. This was a way for unrepentant Marxists to avoid coming to terms with historical errors, for NGOs to make fundraising appeals without sounding like Marxists, and for elitists from the Global South to play the role of victim, casting capitalism as a purely US or European phenomenon. A chief part of this narrative was how neoliberalism violated the sovereignty of poor countries through unfair trade deals. This rhetoric is now coming back to bite the Left in the ass, with the election of a new crop of world leaders who are pro-capitalist but not neoliberal. In a greater irony, the protectionist discourse of the Left actually becomes more effective when paired with the xenophobic discourse of the Right. In the media, “anti-globalization” now means Alt-Right. So many years of mobilizations, Social Forums, and making puppets, down the drain.

[…] Given the lack of unity among capitalists, it is no surprise that Trump enjoys mixed support from the owning class. Some have recently suggested that Trump’s [first] presidency represents “a victory for those sectors of capital worst at valorising themselves.” Not surprisingly, articles expressing such a view are short on examples, because the argument is overly simplistic, as all positions tend to be that present politics as the mere manifestation of the needs of Capital. To be precise, Trump has significant support from the manufacturing, defense, energy, real estate, and finance sectors, some of which are facing a valorization crisis, others of which are not. These are companies with a relatively stable place in the economy, led by extremely wealthy people who trust that the deregulation Trump champions will make their lives easier and their fortunes greater. Their position as cornerstones of the leading world economy, which they have held for decades, makes them feel immune to the rising insecurity. The global scale of their customer base and operations will help them weather any trade wars that Trump provokes. And many of them don’t have to be terribly worried about tariffs and immigration bans because the aforementioned decentralization of capitalist production means they have been starting to relocate manufacturing closer to their consumers. Even before the elections, some of these companies were expanding their production within the US, cutting their labor costs below even the sweatshop level by roboticizing entire factories [ed. – see Return Fire vol.5 pg9]. Since Trump has been loudly blaming immigrants and taking the focus off new technologies, they know they will get a free pass from popular anger over the new forms of exploitation they are using.”

So-called “Artificial Intelligence” is another such field (see Leaving the SPVM Behind to Attack a High-Tech Hub), and one which Trump has now granted huge State funds towards to please the newly-loyal Silicon Valley moguls (as well as the oil, gas and coal magnates – and, why not, wind and solar, often the same companies and depending on the same extractive processes – due to see world-wide production ramp up to fuel the hungry data centres; see The Cryptoliberal Creep). The recent article 'Good Night Tech Right' states that “[b]eyond the increasing financial and environmental costs, accelerated AI production also means creating technologies that by the admission of their own creators, will automate out of existence many jobs – and not just white-collar ones. Many fast-food chains are already working to automate out their workforce through AI, from drive through windows to inside the restaurants themselves. This reality creates a paradox: Trump barely squeaked out a win in 2024 through weaponizing growing resentment against neoliberalism; an economic system defined by corporate globalization and a declining standard of living. But as Forbes wrote, “[A]utomation technology has been the primary driver of U.S. income inequality over the past 40 years…50% to 70% of changes in U.S. wages since 1980 can be attributed to wage declines among blue-collar workers replaced or degraded by automation.” The push by Trump to fuel the growth of AI will of course only accelerate this reality. In short, the Bannonite fantasy [ed. – see Lies of the Land] of “America First” is simply snake-oil: let’s call it for what it is, neoliberalism coming home to roost.” Despite the UK government's recent declaration in face of economic slump that it will turn these isles into another AI powerhouse (as if that ship hadn't already sailed, leaving the business sewn up by China and the US), ironically, Britain itself could be relegated to an extractive frontier as it diminishes in stature on the world stage, with AI implimentation – in data centres, middle management, HR departments, etc. – leading to profits for automated services being skimmed off by the foreign multinationals rather than circulating in the UK, similar to we already see with PayPal but at scale.

Here, it is useful to determine in which ways up until now the break with the neo-liberal model is occuring beyond rhetoric alone. Funnily enough, once again there's an echo of an anti-globalisation era slogan from the liberal wing, demanding 'Fair Trade Not Free Trade'. Returning to 'Long Term Resistance': “While Trump is departing sharply from the neoliberal dream of the world as one large free trade area, he is by no means against free trade. To understand that, we need to acknowledge that free trade is no more free than the free market. It is simply a euphemism for a highly regulated arrangement designed to increase trade volume. This can be achieved through the multilateral agreements [and the global institutions] that were hallmarks of neoliberal politics, or it can achieved through the bilateral trade agreements that Trump is promoting. In theory, the former require that everyone follow the same set of rules (though the European Union, for example, assigned very specific economic roles to different member states, allowing core members to protect industries that peripheral members were forced to de-subsidize). This means that the rules will reflect the interests of the multinational corporations that operate throughout the entirety of the economic area. In the past, those interests were synonymous with the interests of the US and its NATO allies, since all the multinationals of note were North American or Western European. But over time, the benefits began to generalize to the capitalists of all countries.

“ A second tipping point away from neoliberalism is political in nature. Neoliberalism was doomed by the institutional primacy of state power over financial power. A globalized economy needs a global state to regulate it, but power-holders are still firmly national. Their worldviews and interests are developed at the national level, and nearly all their institutional handles pertain to nation-states. In a shortsighted maneuver to maintain their own chauvinistic supremacy, US conservatives gutted the UN – the potential world government – and therefore sabotaged the very world order they put in motion after WWII.

“ While all other politicians were inclined to adhere to a neoliberal strategy that immensely benefited the US but allowed US supremacy to slowly slip away, Trump is making a gamble. The US is no longer the number one global producer, but it is still the largest consumer, meaning it has a unique bargaining position: every country wants access to the US market. If Trump can encourage “free trade” that privileges US interests, he can maintain the US position as global economic leader and maybe even recover the number one manufacturing spot (not by saving factory jobs, of course, but by subsidizing an expansion of robotic labor).”

So, if this isn't enough to stabilise a US-led capitalism, what form might it turn to next to survive? “Obviously,” continues 'Long Term Resistance', “none of us know the future, and nothing appears on earth that does not eventually disappear. Democracy will not last forever. So let’s entertain for a moment the scenario that it will come to an end in the next decade. A crisis of social control could certainly spell the end of democracy. While its specific strategies change over time, the State persists, and its fundamental logic is of social control. Whither will it go?

“ I find it hard to believe that the model for institutional evolution will be the fascist dictatorships of the 20th century for two reasons: one technological and the other systemic. In the age of nanotechnology and the internet of things [ed. – see supplement to Return Fire vol.3; Smarter Prison?], dictatorship is not political, it is material. What’s more, in the pendulum of progress and popular resistance, entire populations do actually become inoculated against certain strategies of state power. Individual institutions tend to hammer down resistance, but systems, as they evolve, seek out the path of least resistance, and their movements are guided by the mentalities of all their members. The figure of the dictator has a bad rep. Though we have not succeeded in revolution, we have at least succeeded in rescuing common sense from the authoritarian ideologies of the past millennia; a vast majority of people are once again distrustful of anyone with a great deal of power. Any system that chooses a political strategy of dictatorship will face a legitimacy crisis from day one.

“ Though the ideological hardcore of the Alt Right is neoreactionary, which is to say they support a dictator, I think the evolutionary usefulness of a populist strongman like Trump is in shaking up a decaying system and forcing experts to articulate the crisis of democracy. He himself is not a model for the way forward. The model will be technocratic states like China that are weathering the economic crisis better than the US, and proving to be politically more stable. The big question, then, is whether a crisis of social control will also become a factor: will popular uprisings threaten power? In that case, which method is more effective at controlling them – authoritarian liquidation or democratic recuperation? If the latter, one-state China will fail as a potential model, and the West will have the opportunity to draw on its own technocratic traditions. Imagine a multi-party democracy in which politicians recommend policy guidelines based on electoral mandate, but it is the technocrats in Central Banks and related institutions (governing everything from environmental protection to gender relations to the borders) that draft and implement the actual policies. As Artificial Intelligence comes to play an increasing role, first in stock exchanges and currency markets, later in public health, environmental protection, traffic and transportation, immigration metrics, and so on, society will learn to accept the figure of the neutral, perfected, trustworthy technocrat.”

Now, even as the Alt-Right revives on the street as its ideas find advocates within the very corridors of US power, it is precisely such a hybrid techno-democracy which could find its synthesis on a global level (though there as also serious limitations to such a model: see Capitalism & Electrification). But we are not in the business of making hard-and-fast predictions. Either way, in our daily struggles today we must still contend with the neo-liberal-derived exclusion described below (off-set as it is by the crumbs of belonging the populists offer the included) married with the cybernetic capitalist model which emerges, is referenced below, and which both a recommended second interview with Andy available at thebrilliant.org (#89) and Cybernetic Mommy Milkers in this double-issue of Return Fire describe. And either way, against the techno-industrial nightmare which has killed off over half mammal species on the planet since the start of neo-liberalism, we pose the need for what has been called a 'luddite artisanry' (see Return Fire vol.5 pg10), regaining land and freedom.]

T.B.: Welcome to The Brilliant podcast, this is around episode fifty eight. This is/should be the last in our ongoing series on exclusion within the anarchist space; although I have a feeling that this is going to be an ongoing topic of interest. Today I’m in a long-distance phone conversation with Andy. How are you doing Andy?

Andy: I’m doing OK thank you, just in the middle of a big research project at the moment on existentialism, but taking some time off on that to revisit some stuff I’ve worked on before about exclusion both in anarchism and in neo-liberal capitalism, [1] in the current stage of capitalism in particular.

T.B.: Well that’s exciting because, the conversations up until now have mostly been about personal experience, and so I’m definitely hoping to round this out with a bit for of a theoretical context. So tell me a little bit about your interest, insofar as you’re researching this topic?

Andy: Well, I’ve come at this kind of topic from a number of different angles. One of them is the question of… is it possible and how is it possible to have forms of social life which are not based on the types of constitutive exclusion which are fundamental is hierarchical systems. Because in a hierarchical system you always have the division between, the conformist and the deviant; the people who are living by the system’s norms and the people who aren’t. And anarchism aspires to be something that doesn’t do that. Even if in practice it often falls short, but I think to a degree it’s able to do without those forms of exclusion because of the structure it’s based on.

Now, I also come to the question in terms of the position of the excluded within… Why is it that we have people who feel they’re excluded from mainstream society, who are attracted to ideas like anarchism? And also the question of the ways in which exclusion has kind of reappeared in anarchist spaces (or intensified in anarchist spaces) recently because of political shifts, possibly derived from the wider context…

T.B.: Well you’re racing ahead! Just to respond to the first point you were making, are you deriving your conversation around exclusion (or I guess the formation of society) sort of as a post-primitivist [2] set of conversations or from a pre-primitivist… in other words, anarchism obviously had a hundred years of existence before primitivism came onto the stage. Where was the history as far as you were concerned of where a non-exclusionary space existed in the theoretical constructs of anarchism prior to primitivism?

Andy: Fairly clearly in Stirner… [3] I mean, Stirner is very much opposed to the idea of values attached to particular categories, values attached to ‘spooks’, [4] and therefore the idea of societies that are constructed around some kind of commonality of nation [5] or humanity or whatever, which then necessarily excludes its opposite, the un-man or the foreigner or the Other of the group. So he’s already trying to work beyond that. I think the aspiration is there…

T.B.: ...Actually how would you distinguish between Stirner and the liberal subject that was constructed in the same timeframe?

Andy: The freedom of the liberal subject is conceived in terms of the ability to act on what Freud [6] would call the super-ego, [7] to act on a moral imperative separate from desire, separate from worldly and social influences, and the subject was considered to be not free if they were acting on anything other than pure moral duty. So in practice (although liberalism was meant to be a philosophy of freeing people from, for example, dependence on tradition) it rapidly turns into subordination to the insistence that everyone be this particular type of subject. [8] Now of course being this particular type of subject reintroduces normativity and the idea that there are those who conform to this well and there are other who are deviant, and the deviant have to be excluded or punished or reconditioned into the right type of person. And Stirner is really attacking that in liberalism; [9] using some of the arsenal he’s getting from Hegel [10] (and via Hegel from Kant [11] ), so it’s coming from that tradition and critiquing it…

T.B.: You know I often when it comes to these ideas try to avoid referring to the sort of source person, especially when they have a name and instead try to refer to a particular body of ideas, or an idea that I like and I try to modernise it. So, one of the things I really liked about this book that we put out (and I didn’t exactly catch it when we first got started on it, but I’m really convinced by now) is this book that we did called ‘Enemies of Society’. And at the heart of it is basically a set of translations of French egoists who were trying to put Stirner’s ideas into practice. And what I really like about the book (and really like at least about that era of egoists) is that it seems like they had come up with an idea of society, that there’s a transition that happens when you perhaps surpass Dunbar’s Number [12] (or however it is that it comes into being), but that there’s a distinction between society – as an abstraction, as a construct that is kind of bigger than you or I can wrap our minds around – and not-society… And I bring that up mostly because I feel like that’s the place that I find some affinity for egoists, is somewhere in here. But really when we’re talking about the liberal subject, the liberal subject seems to be somehow connected to this, being perhaps on the pro-society side of that particular divide.

Andy: Yeah very much so I think… And very much somebody who’s repressed and inhibited. Somebody who’s living primarily through the super-ego.

T.B.: Talk about what that means to you. Because obviously the simple construction of the Freud id/ego/super-ego… perhaps you’re talking beyond that?

Andy: Yeah, the super-ego is part of the ego that’s turned against itself… The ego is all about getting satisfaction from the outer world… reality principle [13] … The super-ego is an internal part of the ego that gets its satisfaction from frustrating the rest of the ego.

Andy: Yeah! Religious self-abnegation… subordination to a cause… self-sacrifice.

T.B.: Right, work ethic… Yeah yeah. OK, interesting. So, onward!

Andy: I think what we find in anarchist movements and autonomist movements at their best, is we find a kind of social world that is not relying on what are generally… I mean there’s this discussion in sociology, there’s all kinds of theories about how societies work and what is and isn’t possible, but there’s this really old distinction that you will still find flying around, between gemeinschaft/gesellschaft (which is roughly “community” and “organisation”); community being usually a prescriptive social order where people are assigned roles, and community has a sense of normativity, a sense of what’s normal, what’s required, that is imposed on everyone through their prescribed roles; an organisation is a formal structure which has more form, it’s more individualistic in that it’s based on contract, it’s based on rules and law and so on…

Andy: Yeah… It’s kind of choice of two kinds of spook-based organisation really. But then you have this sort of third type, which was theorised by some people who were criticising this, called the bund . Now, the idea of the bund is that there is this third form of social organisation that doesn’t rely either on normativity or on this kind of organisation, contracts and rules and so on. It relies on an immanent connection which is established (primarily an emotional connection), and it’s established primarily through action in common. An event, or a ritual, or a practice that the group have in common that then brings the group together feeling that they’re part of a group who are united by (or in relation to) this practice or event.

T.B.: OK, but there’s something like a “bund uprising”, or… For some reason the Beer-Hall Riot [14] era seems like there’s something that’s tickling my mind that has the term “bund” in it… But OK, go on.

Andy: Yeah, it appears in organisation names. There’s a Jewish socialist organisation called The Bund in the early 20th Century, but you also find it on the end of these German agglomerative words sometimes. I’m saying that a bund basically doesn’t have normativity, it has minimum of formal organisation (if any)… By normativity I’m meaning this idea that we have norms that make the world predictable, and there’s something that’s socially acceptable that you have to conform to; and you have a duty to conform to it, which I think is different from having an ethos, or an ethic, or values, or an idea of virtue. And I think the way this has worked in practice in anarchist and autonomist movements is often the big events, or the protest mobilisations, things like eco-camps in the ‘80s and ‘90s, [15] and things like the summit protests in late ‘90s/early 2000’s, [16] the squatting scene and the big street protests and clashes that can happen around that… It’s something like Greece in 2008 [17] (you know, the big uprising in Greece)…

T.B.: Actually I want to get precise here. Because really what you’re talking about is the affinity group (and the affinity group model and the different variations on it)…

T.B.: ...But that model, especially in the North American context, has pretty much ended. By and large (along with the code-word “security culture”) [18] [there] has been a dissolution of anything that even looks like a bund, [so] that when we do an action on the group nowadays, we do it as a series of whatever-singularities. [19] And it seems to be that the radical distinction here has to do with this attempt to move us in the direction of the French (and especially the thinkers around the Invisible Committee) [20] and their idea of “friendship”… So I’m curious where you would draw the line between an anarchist position (perhaps around the bund) and this new, autonomist-type position around the “friend”.

Andy: I think they’re actually probably quite similar in that key dimension. I mean, what I’ve read of the Invisible Committee stuff, when they talk about a commune [21] they’re again talking about something where the friendship, the affinity, is produced in practice. It’s not necessarily something that’s produced through an organisation.

T.B. Sure... I’m actually saying that I think there might be a fourth form.

Andy: Yeah, I think there are different forms of… I think it’s possibly a different form of the bund, but you might be right that it’s a kind of fourth type. I think there’s probably a reason, I mean… I get the impression that possibly the type of anarchist and autonomous organisation that was about fifteen years ago (and was very strong then) has maybe gone into decline because of the difficulty in generating and sustaining the type of large-scale temporary-autonomous-zone-like events that maybe is what sustained that.

T.B.: I mean just to speak to this a bit more in depth, I feel like there was an incident here in the US that really showed the weakness of the affinity group. And this has to do with the fact that in the US context what we call the Green Scare [22] was largely fed by the fact that this personal who had a personal moral weakness (i.e. they were a drug addict) basically flipped on their comrades and then wore a mic to hang out with them. And obviously it’s useful to compare this in the UK context to Mark Kennedy or “Mark Stone” [23] who obviously also had a personal weakness which I guess I would take a stab at saying was the ladies, and did something very similar, where a lot of people’s information was shared... And I feel like somewhere in there was built in the end of the affinity group. [24]

Andy: He was actually an undercover cop who was being employed by a sort of special operations/special demonstrations squad, [25] and had been sent in to infiltrate and was eventually caught.

T.B.: The point I’m making is that his personal failings is probably why he continued doing it, rather than that he loved his job so much.

Andy: Yeah, but we also have a situation here where we had a massive crackdown on the animal rights movement not long before the Green Scare happened, or around the same time.

T.B.: Right… was that the ‘Gandalf’ trial [26] or something else?

Andy: No, the SHAC [27] trials, late 2000’s. (I think a bit after the Green Scare actually.) But SHAC was pretty much destroyed, and up until then they’d been an inspiration for a lot of the other direct action that was going on. But it’s also partly generational I think: the people who’d grown up in the generations of the ‘80s and ‘90s and then the people who’d sort of become active during that big summit protest wave were getting older, and for a lot of them I think Occupy [28] and the 2011 stuff was probably their last big movement. And the generation who are taking over now are people who’ve grown up in this very securitised post-9/11 context. They have a very difference relationship to themselves, the system…

Andy: ...yeah; to anarchy, to the idea that anarchism is based on, and to the older generations. And they seem to have the kind of fetish of security and this kind of safe spaces stuff; [29] but at the same time to be more open to things like social media [30] and constant self-exposure and self-branding and so on. [31] That doesn’t fit well with the affinity model, DIY [do-it-yourself] politics or social centres or things that had been done. So they’re really sort of transforming everything into their way of doing it or going off in a different way; I think that’s really what’s shifted. But yeah, when Kennedy was exposed the network in his local town and a lot of other people then burned out, or dropped out… It did have a big disruptive effect.

T.B.: Well, what I’m really trying to tease out here (which you’re obviously on the same page) is that I see that this gap that we’re talking about between these… where you’re talking about the bund, I think this friendship category is also a place that I at least want to explore because I actually think that there’s been a lot of pain in it; but that hasn’t been explored that much. And then this: we’re not talking about yet a third category, which I would describe myself as having to do with the internet and this generation of people who weren’t raised hanging out on a street corner with their buds (and then it naturally turned into something political...). Instead, the new generation of people have basically… their first exposure to other human being people is via politics on the internet.

Andy: Yeah, that is increasingly what’s happening. And initially that took quite an anarchic form. [32] You had things like #Anonymous, [33] and before that other ‘hacktivist’ groups, some things like Indymedia, [34] but I think as it’s gone on it’s increasingly become… I mean, the way social media in particular is structured (social media is a relatively recent, sort of really starts to grow in the late 2000’s): there’s a tendency to people to cluster in very densely clustered networks, in which they’re clustered with other people who share their beliefs and interests. And they tend to share information, points of view and social pressure, which reproduces – and even radicalises and polarises – those particular views and interests; and I think it's in that context really that you get a very different style of politics, of this almost micro-nationalism of different groups and factions, whether that be identity politics, [35] whether that be alt-right and ultra-nationalism, whether that be people with very intense political loyalties. We've got a newly-emergent traditional Left, a sort of socialist Left, who have also got that kind of structure. And it seems to be structured into the social media that the community takes this particular form – that there is very strong... what Jean-Paul Sartre used to call fraternity terror. There is this relationship where you commit to the group: by committing to the group you are committing to do your part in the group, to uphold the group norms...

Andy: Yeah. And if you don't, you're out. And worst case scenario, if you don't you're dead. But usually, these days, you're out of the group: you're shunned, you're ostracized – or you're banned. [36]

T.B.: Well, and that does bring us back around to people's modern experiences; which is that more and more social categories seem to be taking on these characteristics. So why do you think that's the case and relate it back to Sartre, because that's interesting and I haven't heard that before.

Andy: In Sartre's theory, basically we start out in seriality (which is atomisation, alienation, everyone's a separate person, the relationship to the other is competition or is one of being a series; like people queuing for a bus). A fused group (which is basically the same thing as a bund) happens when a group comes together for something in common, in relation to an object or project or an immediate threat. Sartre's example is the storming of the Bastille; [37] so, a big uprising would be an example of this. But the problem with that is that it's somewhat fleeting and it breaks down when you've lost that immediate focus. And the way people try to keep organisations going (obviously you've got the French and the Russian revolutions in mind here) is by forming more rigid organisations which then attempt to enforce loyalty to the group norms through taking an oath, or taking a pledge, making a commitment: you join the party and you have the party commitment, you'd have to sell the paper so many times a week and whatever. And when you do this you get this fraternity terror.

Now, it eventually evolves through two others; there's the organisation then there's the institution, which are different but that doesn't really matter that much... What I think we've undergone is this process of... Anarchism and autonomous movements (and identity-based movements really) in the '80s, '90s, 2000's are really fused-group type: and they flip toward pledged group I think partly as a result of social media, partly as a result of scarcity in the social context, partly as a result of movement defeat and difficulty producing... I mean, the fused groups are really held together by those emotions. You have those big events, you have powerful emotion, exhilaration, and empowerment, and this feeling you could do things that you couldn't do before: and that really is what holds the movement together. But then when you get this big counter-insurgency [38] wave and suddenly people feel like you can't do that anymore; you're not getting those emotions anymore: and the new generation coming up I think have never had them. Other people have had them but have burned out, they've been traumatised by repression or they've just... It's too long since they've had their big event, it's lost that inspiring force; that glue of the social movement has come apart.

T.B.: Actually I'd like to hear your thoughts... Of course, when we have this conversation in the US it entirely hinges around the failures and the defeats since Occupy. But you didn't really have a parallel to the Occupy movement; what you had instead at that time was literally a month of social unrest. [39] Can you talk about what the consequences of that were?

Andy: The British movement had had... there had been a wave of militancy in the '80s and '90s deriving from [then-Prime Minister] Thatcher imposing neo-liberalism; that had led initially to a lot of labour revolt, then there was a big green movement. There was a huge eco-camps wave in the '90s, and then Britain had its kind of little bit of the summit protest wave with J18 in London in 1999. [40] That wave kind of fizzled out around 2003-ish, but what we then had was the Iraq war: [41] and there was a massive, massive demonstration, hundreds of thousands of people against the Iraq war. Not that much direct action; RAF [Royal Air Force base] Fairford was occupied at one point, but mostly sort of just huge marches. And the government just ignored it. And ignored public opinion, and ignored expert advice, and ignored legal complications, and ignored media hostility, and just went ahead regardless. And I think the effect that had is, if we can get hundreds of thousands out, we can get this really sympathetic environment, and it does no good... what's the point. And the movement just started fizzling out after that. Now, I think part of the reason that nothing happened is that there was not enough action around it, it was just... There were a lot of people on the streets but there wasn't any real threat to the government, so they could just ignore it.

But the movement then kind of dwindles; you then see the SHAC model comes into fashion, and you have small-scale groups carry out actions, ranging in the degree of militancy but something like that kind of Italian affinity group model. [42] And that starts to fizzle out when SHAC is destroyed in the late 2000s. And then at just that point you have this social crisis, which I think by the way is stemming from [the] 2008 financial crash; and up until then the poorer and middling groups had been kind of treading water. People weren't getting any better off, you didn't really have a chance of the good life, but you could survive: and after that it really became increasingly difficult for people. [In] 2011 there was that huge wave of... it was actually only about four or five days, but huge wave of street revolt which there was really very little anarchist or activist involvement in, [43] this was coming from marginalised communities, coming from working class people.

T.B.: I just happen to know people in Brixton who very much felt like anarchists were involved.

T.B.: But you didn't feel like there was enough there for there to be a large feeling? Because it sort of prefigured our Black Lives Matter movement here in the States, because it was about police violence.

Andy: Yep, very similar phenomenon in that sense: wasn't really a movement, it was kind of...

Andy: Yeah, eruption over a few days. It starts in this one area in London where the guy [Mark Duggan] had been killed (basically assassinated by the police) and then the police were mistreating people who were protesting against it and it erupts in this area; then spreads to the rest of London; then to the rest of the UK. But I got the feeling... I don't know the dynamics in London so well, but other parts of the UK it just took people so much by surprise that people didn't really have time to respond...

Andy: Yeah. Occupy also happened, on a very small scale. There was a lot going on around... there'd been some very militant student protests in 2010-11 as well, Tory party headquarters was occupied and this kind of thing, [44] but I think what really happened is the government cracked down really hard after that wave of unrest and started giving out draconian sentences, and that kind of put the lid on it for the time being, and nothing after that seems to have been all that... There's been little upsurges; the #Anonymous marches on 5th of November are always a bit... some of those have been quite interesting [45] but there's not a huge amount goes on. [46]

T.B.: Well obviously this is a useful time, since you're talking about 2008 and there's maybe been a malaise in the UK since then, this is a good time to talk about neo-liberalism and the impact of neo-liberalism on the topics of exclusion. Because it does seem to relate back to the talk about the liberal subject.

Andy: And of course neo-liberalism has effects on anarchists and activists the same as it does on everyone else; and one of the things it has done is undercut both some of routes into anarchism (particularly, it's a lot harder to live on benefits now, it's a lot harder to be a student and be politically active, it's a lot harder to have temporary part-time work and not be massively overworked by it)... But I think in general the climate is based on... neo-liberalism is based on generalised anxiety. And the source of a lot of that anxiety is... Basically, if people are living by active desire, if people are living by the things they want and the things they feel, capitalism and the State are not going to be sustainable. So capitalism and the State have to find ways to decompose, block, stop those kinds of feelings; and it varies over time what they do. In Fordism [47] it was sort of monotony, it was these very entrenched institutions that didn't seem escapable; in neo-liberalism I think basically... Fordism broke down with the autonomist waves of the '60s and '70s, the flight from the workplace, refusal of work, drop-out culture; people started to escape from the factory as a site of work, and the education system and so on. Capitalism has tried to deal with that by bringing itself out into the rest of society, turning it into one big social factory and closing and controlling all society. But the other thing I think it's done is it's tried to undercut that level of minimum guarantee which lets people drop out without immediately coming up against survival problems. And that's how it's undermined the activism of that period.

T.B.: I don't want to dwell too much on living in the UK, but obviously the big counter-argument to this conversation is the fact that Brexit is the way in which the UK is “fighting back” against neo-liberalism, just like here in the US of course Trumpism is the way in which we're fighting back against neo-liberalism. Does that feel comfortable to you, or does that feel ridiculous?

Andy: Yes, that's exactly what's happening; and in France it's Le Pen... [48] it's this kind of right-wing populism in a lot of places. It's a slightly different constituency; the people you would get in autonomous social movements tend to be... there's a BBC survey that uses the term 'emergent service worker'. These are people who are on the lowest rungs of the service economy (the 'New Economy'), [49] tend to be university-educated or at least educated to some degree, tend to be involved in the New Economy, tend to living in cities where there's a little bit going on. The people who are into Brexit and things like that tend to be the people who were relatively included under Fordism, but they've really been hurt by the transition to the so-called New Economy. These are people who live often in small industrial/post-industrial cities, cities that used to have industry that has been run down because the country is moving towards competing in a global economy; or also sometimes rural areas. It's traditional working class people who are manual workers, who haven't got the education to work in the service economy but the jobs have been taken away as the industries have been taken away to China and places ike that. [50]

T.B.: Obviously our society is a bit more racialised: we refer to these people as the remnants of the white working class.

Andy: Yep. That's exactly who we're on about. And it's the same phenomenon [which] in France they call France Peripherique , the peripheral France. They're the people in the towns that are just too small to be part of the global economy. In Britain people tend to say the north of England, although it's not just the north of England, but sort of ex-industrial... but basically London is booming because it's a global city, the rest of the UK's kind of left behind, but the dynamics are really complicated because you've got regional nationalisms, you've got little development hubs in other areas, you've got certain social groups that are very conservative anyway...

T.B.: Let's turn this around back into a conversation around exclusion within the anarchist space. Because obviously, it does seem like a “monkey see, monkey do” problem where we’re not exactly innovating at this moment… Where what we in the US call call-out culture, [51] identity politics, seems to be chasing the dog. And so let’s talk about that a little bit.

Andy: Yeah… What I’d like to say first about that is I think there are these shifts within neo-liberalism which are based on exclusion and threat of exclusion as what normalises the labour-capital relation for those people who are included. And what I mean by this is, people are treated as disposable; and people can be arbitrarily fired or punished (and excluded from that layer of people who are included and exploited) on very little basis. And this is quite different from Fordism, which had near-full employment and which had things like welfare state. And you see this series of practices: basically, we’re under an obligation to be communicable, in order to be employable and so on, but we don’t have a right to be communicable. Basically, we don’t have a right to be included. That’s something we had to earn as a privilege that can be taken away.

So you see everything from, like, capital will disinvest: disinvest in Greece because they’ve had a revolt or because they’re not paying their debts back, will disinvest in swathes of Africa, forcibly de-link. Workers who don’t behave as they’re supposed to will be fired. Kids will be kicked out of school. Social services will be cut off. Areas will be occupied, put on lockdown. People will be put in destitution, just not have any money at all. Prisoners get put in solitary confinement, these kind of regimes like Super Max and Guantanamo: this is really social death, cutting people off from communicablity. And this is hitting particularly the excluded, the surplus population, the people who don’t have jobs in the economy at all: and this is what’s causing revolts like the Arab Spring. [52] And it has in it this kind of logic – I’ve seen it called democide [53] – killing people by letting them die, by taking away the basis for them to survive in a context where the system is monopolising the basis to survive and making it as hard as it can for someone to live outside it; at the same time telling people there’s no outside, pretending to be the social totality (which really it isn’t, but it passes itself off as).

T.B.: OK. So again, I want to stay focused on the micro-politics of this rather than the macro. Because… the one thing I am enjoying about this is that it’s very unusual in the US context for us to link neo-liberalism to capitalism and to explicitly capitalist social relationships, because identity politics in much more the lingua franca here in the US context. But to put it more bluntly, what you are saying is that to the extent to which… well, are you comfortable with the term social capital? [54] Do you like that term? Do you think it’s useful?
