---
title: "Chasing Dreams, Fighting Nightmares"
author: "RebelNet Revolutionary Propaganda Dept."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rebelnet-revolutionary-propaganda-dept-chasing-dreams-fighting-nightmares"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Invitation to Imagine Another World"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rebelnet-revolutionary-propaganda-dept-chasing-dreams-fighting-nightmares.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rebelnet-revolutionary-propaganda-dept-chasing-dreams-fighting-nightmares.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Our Story        Home        Food        Economy        Community        Myth        Your invitation to RebelNet Questions. It’s questions that drive us. It’s questions that teach us. It’s questions than move us from acceptance to doubt, from the convert to the curious, from illusion into truth. From the very first breath of this universe inhaled we begin our explorations, our very own experiments, enraptured with mysterious wonder at this unique experience of life. Then, slowly but surely, our sense of curiosity begins to fade; our imagination gets hijacked, and our lust for adventure is under siege. We stop asking questions, and start obeying instructions. We absorb stories about our nature, distorted for an agenda, conceived by the least of us. We are held under constant threat of deprivation of our fundamental needs by structures, corporations and agents of control whose very authority depends on our obedience and ignorance. We all know this. We can all feel it, some more than others. Whilst a privileged few fly first class to dine with ‘associates’ plotting endless financial growth, many struggle to provide food for their family and to pay rent for their home — which is owned by the bank or business man. Whilst The Few have the luxury of ambition, others are confined by desperation. Whilst the ‘powers that be’ own everything you need to survive, you barely own your own chains. And we accept this, like it’s natural, normal, like it’s what we deserve... that is, until disaster strikes! As the rising tides cascade our shores and disease spreads across the globe; as the rain falls for 2 months straight and thousands seek refuge from war torn lands; as the elderly are evicted and the youth fight depression; as the rich get power and the poor get neglect — it is in crisis that we remember what we have lost. When the world ends, as we come out from our homes and tear down our barricades, we offer mutual aid to those in need and solidarity with strangers. The streets flood with color as we break up the concrete and sow seeds of transformation in the remains of the ruins. And we start again asking the questions which have been buried for so long. When did you last look at the stars? When did you last touch the soil? When did you last receive information that wasn’t from a screen? Who was it even from? (Did you trust them?) Do you ever feel pressure to be someone you don’t want to be? Like your life is not your own? Do you ever feel trapped in a cage to which you did not consent? Each day a carbon copy of itself? Do you sometimes wonder if there could be more to life than this? What if your world could be modified? What if your life could be hacked? What if you could take back your power, your agency, your energy from the authorities that have stolen it? What would your world look like then? We call it The Tipping Point. The moment in time when everything came to a head — the climate emergency, mass migration, governments who refused to do anything about either, locked into capitalism and controlled by corporations. Populations pushed to breaking point by austerity policies that left thousands homeless and hungry while the wealthy got wealthier. And on top of it all, a mental health crisis of epic proportions, people of a digital age who were more disconnected than ever, losing the ability to converse, to empathise, to even notice what was going on around them. All these problems, bubbling, simmering away under the surface, that shiny veneer that this was how things were Supposed To Be. But the cracks were starting to show. As the world barrelled along towards self-destruction, we were balanced on the perfect pinnacle of madness, and all it needed was one small nudge to send it all tumbling down... It came, of course. Two decades into the 21 st century, a pandemic swept the globe that opened people’s eyes. The veil was lifted, and it threw into stark relief just how mad and bad things had become. It wasn’t a great leveler, t…
