---
title: "Boundary Violations"
author: "Hakim Bey"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hakim-bey-boundary-violations"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "References: For the text of the APA report, The Lower East Side Rose (vol. 2, no. 12 [51], April 1, 1994); Paul Feyerabend’s definitive Farewell to Reason (Verso, 1987); and J. Wafer’s excellent Bakhtinian study of “Spirit Possession in Brazilian Candomblé”, The Taste of Blood (University of Pennsyl"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "hakim-bey-boundary-violations.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hakim-bey-boundary-violations.epub"
    hosted: false
---

There exist historians of the 18 th century who refuse to deal with freemasonry. Their “reasoning” seems to run as follows: – “The Masons believed in mumbojumbo. I do not believe in mumbojumbo. Therefore the Masons are unimportant – indeed, virtually nonexistent.” The eye in the pyramid stares out of everyone’s pocket – and yet still these historians refuse to admit that masonry has any historical significance. Nowadays, thousands are afflicted with alien encounters, UFO sexual molestations by the 100’s; countless others are afflicted with memories of Satanic Abuse. But according to serious science, neither Satan nor UFO’s exist. “Therefore” the abduction hysteria has no historical significance and can scarcely be said to exist. Right? No, wro ng. Obviously UFO’s and UFO-hysteria can be considered as two different things, lacking all ontological co-dependency. That is, UFO’s may or may not “exist”, but they need not exist (except perhaps as an “archetype”) in order to arouse the interest of historians in the hysteria and induce them to attempt to interpret it. The hysteria is real and important, “history in the making” as the newsreels used to squawk – but its significance remains buried because “science” has mistaken the content of the hys teria for its inner structure. Now that Freud has been defenestrated – along with the Unconscious – modern psychotherapy can offer an all-purpose etiology for all UFO/Satanic “memories”: – child abuse. In a recent statement on the subject the APA cautioned that the falsity of certain “memories” should not be used as an excuse to ignore the underlying trauma – or deep inner structure of the “memory” – which is assumed to be “real” abuse. The idea that repressed sexuality in childhood might cause false memories to arise as defense mechanisms in later life has been junked; the “seduction theory” has been revived, and transformed into the “abuse theory.” This theory presupposes the non-existence of “infant and childhood sexuality” (in Freudian terms), and in a broader sense, the non-existence of childhood desire. A tendency arises to regard the child as an erotic blank, incapable of any authentic con-sensuality. Therefore all points of contiguity between the concept “childhood” and the concept “sexuality” can be subsumed into one new and exhaustive concept: – “abuse”. The APA offers an interesting paraphrase of the abuse-concept when it mentions “conditions that are associated with boundary violations in [the patient’s] past.” New professional jargon always provides the semanticist/sociologist a golden opportunity to unpack hidden political and psychological content from tell-tale words and phrases – and boundary violation is a veritable trick suitcase – a richness of embarrassments. We’d need a whole monograph to dump all the items jammed into this little portmanteau. The metaphor of nationalism springs to mind first of all – boundaries are borders, violations are invasions. The individual is hypostatized not as a sovereign monarch (who might after all mingle and mate with other monarchs) but as a closed-off area ssurroundedby an abstract grid of map-lines, political separations, exclusions. A border-crossing here is a violation, not an act of trade, or love, or harmonial association. The border is not a skin which can be caressed, it is a barrier. In relation to the inviolate body, all “others” are simply potential wetbacks, illegal immigrants, terrorists traveling on forged documents. The next obvious metaphor is the immune system. In fact, we can mix metaphors already here, like the Iranian scholar M. Rahnema (quoted by P. Feyerabend in Farewell to Reason, p. 298) who “has compared the effects of developmental aid with the effect of the illness Aids.” The meddling of Capital in the “third” world has a viral effect – it breaks down immune systems made up of traditionally-scaled economics and values, and replaces them only with diseased “growth”. This is true – but the use of the metaphor is …
