---
title: "Censored: Persons Die, Ideals are Eternal"
author: "Mitchell Cowen Verter"
date: "2016"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mitchell-cowen-verter-censored-persons-die-ideals-are-eternal"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "AJODA # 62, Fall-Winter 2006, Vol. 24, No. 2 From AJODA #62"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mitchell-cowen-verter-censored-persons-die-ideals-are-eternal.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mitchell-cowen-verter-censored-persons-die-ideals-are-eternal.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Censored Selections        Persons Die, but Noble Ideals are Eternal        Acknowledgments Thanks to everyone at Anarchy for printing the sections of my new AK Press volume, Dreams of Freedom: A Ricardo Flores Magon Reader , that have been censored by my collaborator, Chaz Bufe. I hope that AK Press will agree to restore my work if this book should go into a second printing. Because he was an already-published author, Chaz was granted total supervisory authority over the volume by AK Press. After I had been working on the book for several months, Chaz slandered one of my earlier translations, encouraging AK Press to remove me from the project. I had to beg AK to allow me to resume my endeavors. This initial experience taught me the clear lesson that Chaz’s control over the project would be complete. As Chaz himself admits in his dedication, I did most of the work on the volume, selecting and organizing the essays, contacting prominent Flores Magon scholars such as Benjamin Maldonado, writing the historical overview, compiling the bibliography and chronology, and so forth. Chaz delegated himself the role of an editor, giving himself the ultimate authority to censor my work. After reading my introductory preface “Persons Die: Noble Ideals are Eternal, ” Chaz sent me a highly abusive letter attacking, among other things, my references to the prophet Amos and to the ethical philosopher Emmanuel Levinas. Rather than trying to discuss and reach a compromise about our philosophical and stylistic differences (as book collaborators and anarchists are supposed to do), Chaz made a simple threat: “If you’re adamant on this, this is the end of the project because there’s no way on earth that I’ll put my name to this. ” Eventually, Chaz and I came to an agreement: I would modify the preface to take into account his objections. Furthermore, I would sign the piece myself, thereby absolving him of any responsibility for the ideas expressed therein. With this, I thought the matter was settled. Unfortunately, I underestimated Chaz’s treachery. Once my work on the book had been completed, I was never given an opportunity to review it. Typically, authors are allowed to see the page proofs of their text so that they can make any last minute edits. In contrast, I was never shown what was being done to my writing. When I asked AK Press about this, I was told to talk to Chaz. Chaz told me not to worry; he would be doing all the editing himself. I finally received images of the book after it had already been sent to the printers, thereby preventing me from making any changes and from seeing how Chaz had changed it. To my horror, Chaz mauled my writing beyond recognition. Either forgetting our earlier agreement, willfully ignoring it, or just sloppily overlooking it, Chaz eviscerated my introductory preface. Nevertheless, he signed my name to this piece that he clumsily rewrote. Worse yet, Chaz stripped away half of my acknowledgements section. While I can perhaps comprehend an overzealous editor ravaging a writer’s work, what could be more sacrosanct than an author’s opportunity to thank the people he wants to thank? One could argue endlessly about who is the better writer, but these aesthetic issues are beside the point. What has been appalling to me is the manner in which I was systematically, deliberately, and deceptively excluded from making decisions about my own work. I had once harbored the notion that we anarchists were supposed to arrive together at mutually agreeable solutions to conflicts. In contrast, Chaz has thoroughly abused his authority, utterly disrespecting me—his collaborator—by sabotaging my work behind his back. Ironically, the next book being published by Chaz is about consensus decision making. What utter hypocrisy. - Mitchell Cowen Verier by Mitchell Cowen Verter [The Mexican anarchists teach us “Las personas mueran, pero los ideales buenas son etemos”: Persons die, but noble ideals are eternal. This romantic notion con…
