---
title: "Anarchism and the dictatorship of the proletariat"
author: "Matthew Crossin"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matthew-crossin-anarchism-and-the-dictatorship-of-the-proletariat"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A response to Chris Cutrone"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "matthew-crossin-anarchism-and-the-dictatorship-of-the-proletariat.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matthew-crossin-anarchism-and-the-dictatorship-of-the-proletariat.epub"
    hosted: false
---

AT THE PLATYPUS AFFILIATED SOCIETY’S 2021 Midwest Regional Conference Chris Cutrone presented a teach-in dedicated to what he, with a good deal of merit, has deemed “the most controversial proposition by Marxism”: the call for a “dictatorship of the proletariat.” [1] Despite the historical baggage associated with the phrase, Cutrone has argued that it is necessary to address the substance of Marx’s position, given his view that it is “how Marxism distinguishes itself,” both in terms of theory and organizational practice. [2] Furthermore, Cutrone believes that it is the Left’s “abandonment” of the dictatorship of the proletariat — as a “prognosis, intellectual project and political program” — which has resulted in its “death,” or irrelevance to any productive revolutionary project. [3] In this response I want to examine Cutrone’s thesis from a critical, anarchist communist perspective. Though I have read and learned a great deal from much of Marx’s work I do not consider myself a Marxist or find its “political program” (meaning Marx’s strategic approach to transforming society) convincing. I have previously argued that Marx’s writings present us with an underdeveloped, contradictory, and obscurantist analysis of the State; a theoretical framework which obfuscates both differences and commonalities with the anarchist view. [4] As we shall see, this is also the case with Marx’s closely related conception of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the many contradictions of which are neatly encapsulated within Cutrone’s discussion, beginning with his initial attempt to offer a succinct definition: What did Marx and Marxism mean by the “dictatorship of the proletariat”? Very simply, the political rule by the working class. The form of such rule was meant to be “dictatorial” in the sense of revolutionary, politically and socially transformative, overruling social and political norms of constitutional government. It was meant to be a “state of emergency” and hence a dictatorship in the sense of the Ancient Roman Republic, an active political intervention into society of limited duration. [5] Though the reference to the Roman Republic is ambiguous (if he wished to merely indicate the temporary nature of the “dictatorship,” it was unwise to reference a temporary form of governmental power), Cutrone’s definition appears to echo the more libertarian reading of Marx on this question, well-articulated by the scholar Hal Draper, wherein the dictatorship of the proletariat is synonymous with the act of social revolution. In his major work on the subject Draper contends that, “Marx thinks of class dictatorships [bourgeois or proletarian] in terms of the class nature of political power, rather than in terms of special governmental forms.” [6] With such a reading, the phrase “dictatorship of the proletariat” can be rearticulated as follows: it is a revolutionary transformation of social relations (and therefore, necessarily, an event of limited duration), outside of and against the political norms of constitutional government. There is, to this point, no conflict with the revolutionary anarchist position , dating back to the emergence of anarchism as a real mass movement of the proletariat, and the influential contributions to its foundation by Mikhail Bakunin. This has been explicitly stated on many occasions. As the great Italian anarchist communist Errico Malatesta wrote to his friend and comrade, Luigi Fabbri: [Perhaps] our Bolshevized friends intend with the expression “dictatorship of the proletariat” merely the revolutionary act of the workers in taking possession of the land and of the instruments of labor and trying to constitute a society for organizing a mode of life in which there would be no place for a class that exploited and oppressed the producers. Understood so the dictatorship of the proletariat would be the effective power of all the workers intent on breaking down capitalist society, and it would become anarchy immediately upo…
