---
title: "The FBI is a Racket and a Menace"
author: "GSO Legal Defense"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gso-legal-defense-the-fbi-is-a-racket-and-a-menace"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "History and Commentary on RICO, The Federal Government's Most Weaponized Litigation Tool"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gso-legal-defense-the-fbi-is-a-racket-and-a-menace.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gso-legal-defense-the-fbi-is-a-racket-and-a-menace.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       FOREWORD        INTRODUCTION        RICO CONSPIRACY        SUBSTANTIVE RICO        A SELECTED RICO TIMELINE        Afterword        After-Afterword “ Conspiracy charges are convenient for police and feds because they don’t require authorities to prove that any actual illegal activity took place, only shared intent. In that regard, they're and ideal weapon to wield against ideologically based communities; they also lend themselves to government agencies attempts to entrap inexperienced organizer and activists.” -Jeff Change, author of Can't Stop, Won't Stop note: Broken Window has largely kept the original text intact, with minor edits for clarity or updates for passed time, and has added several items to the RICO Timeline. The intent and spirit of the original text was integral to this publisher's understanding of political solidarity in the legal system at the time, and in the current context of late 2019 it seemed appropriate to release a 2nd edition. The writers of this zine never wanted to become RICO experts. Before December 2011, our knowledge extended to Ricos of the Coco and Suave variety, and not much beyond. But then a bunch of our friends and a bunch of our friends's friends got kidnapped by federal law enforcers and locked up without bail. We go tour hands on the indictment that the paramilitary goon squad (known to the earnest citizens of our fair city as the Safe Streets Task Force) had shoved in their back pockets as they abducted Latin Kings in Greensboro. They were being charged with RICO. We learned what they took besides our dudes: drawings, hats, beads, clothes, letters. It struck us as funny at the time – what a bunch of bozos these feds are, they don’t have any drugs or guns or money to take, just a crayon drawing of a lion and a black & yellow Steeler's jersey! Surely this is just another frivolous harassment, writ large – but now, seven years later, the same men are still in jail. Why? Because RICO prosecutions don’t necessarily need body bags or packs of coke to delete a free life. RICO is a unique, potent, and highly evolved litigation tool that was designed to find convictions where conventional law fails. It criminalizes thought, intention, and circumstance. So a drawing or a wardrobe with a certain chromatic character suddenly becomes damning under RICO. When RICO hit in court, we got a sense of just how slimy and conniving RICO is. Dismissed charges are exhumed for their relevance in a federal jurisdiction. Surveillance technology places you where organized criminals are understood to be. Informants shed light where the eye in the sky cant see. Plea bargainers confirm the structure of the enterprise and nobly seek truth; perhaps, incidentally, they will be exonerated or given reduced time. Testifying cops help corroborate shaky narratives. “Experts” shit all over everything. And prosecutors will brandish shiny weapons no one ever used. What RICO amounts to is the crime of (already) being (determined) criminal. It's dangerous because its pre-emptive – Minority Report stylized a futurist version of that fear, American military leaders have bested opponents bogged down by linear time by retaliating preemptively. Its dangerous because its disrupts autonomous self-organized, affinity-based relationships in the name of regulating associations within private organizations. It's slimy because it generates signifiers of crime – the old Sicilian gangster, the young black hood, the face-tattooed brown teen – and the reproduces them by wielding them relentlessly as science in front of doughy juries who've watched enough Gangland to know how to do some civic good: Get a conviction, let em 'em rot. Theres a binary and empirical hysteria surrounding criminals in our society. If you're not good, you're evil; if you're not innocent, you're guilty; if you can't earn a living, your income is illegitimate. Hollywood has left us with a psychic allergy to nuance in the representation of criminality. Washington m…
