---
title: "Anarchism from the Margins"
author: "Jeff Shantz"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-shantz-anarchism-from-the-margins"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Introducing New Developments in Anarchist Studies"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jeff-shantz-anarchism-from-the-margins.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-shantz-anarchism-from-the-margins.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Impetus        From the Margins: The NAASN Conference        Perspectives Anarchism is enjoying a rather remarkable renaissance, in theory and in practice, through the first decades of the twenty-first century. Notably this renaissance is taking place simultaneously in the streets and in the schools, in activism as well as in academia. The reasons for the resurgence of anarchism are varied but without question the primary impetus has been the community opposition to neoliberal capitalist globalism and associated regimes of austerity and repression along with the pressing fact of ecological crisis. Many are inspired to act by the enormity of current social and ecological harms and the growing realization among wider sectors of the population that these are not problems that can be resolved within the framework of state managed capitalist development. At the same time many among newer generations of activists, and some of the earlier generations, have seen or learned from the failures of previous frameworks of resistance politics, particularly the statist forms of the various Marxisms and social democracies. For many, anarchism stands as the most promising basis for analyzing and understanding contemporary capitalist societies and for informing an opposition to capitalist arrangements in such as way as to pose a realistic, positive, liberatory alternative. In the North American context it is reasonable to suggest that anarchism, both as social movement and as social theory, is presently at the highest level of activity and influence it has achieved at least since the flourishing of New Left politics in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It is also safe to say that the diversity and depth of anarchist ideas, and the range of research and scholarship, are well beyond that achieved in that earlier wave (which does not detract from the great quality of many of those works of the 1960s and 1970s). Not only areas of study for which anarchism has a more ready association, such as sociology or politics, but fields such as horticulture, literary criticism, aesthetics, urbanism, and technology studies among others have seen developments in anarchist research. Significantly, social developments in terms of struggle and resistance have intersected with developments in terms of academic research and scholarship at various levels. Younger people engaged in struggles in the streets against capitalist globalization and neoliberal austerity have entered the post-secondary classrooms bringing their critique of existing structures with them and turning their critical eye toward academic disciplines that too often reinforce or sustain existing relations of power rather than, as scholarship should anyway, contesting them. At the same time current students are faced with the political impotency and inaction of the recent challengers to radical theory, notably postmodernism and poststructuralism and various cultural theories that have lost attentiveness to political and economic structures of power, exploitation, and inequality, and which have substituted detached personalistic cynicism for engaged collective action. And such “critical” theories have proven of little use as tools in the most pressing struggles of the day, particularly against neoliberal austerity and the new enclosures of land and labor. Indeed, the trajectory of postmodernist theorizing has shown it to be too easily rendered an apology for or facilitator of such processes. The new scholars have sought alternatives to moribund mainstream and orthodox theories and, as they may have in the streets, found overlooked, forgotten, discarded histories of critical and radical theory that provide better, more insightful answers to their questions—they have found anarchism. Notably they have found that not only does anarchism address important contemporary concerns, they have also found that anarchist theory was often present at the inception of the academic field they are studying yet has …
