---
title: "About a Project for Anarchist Organization"
author: "Luigi Fabbri"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luigi-fabbri-about-a-project-for-anarchist-organization"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Su un progetto di organizzazione anarchica, in Il Martello (New York), 17/24 September 1927. From “Piattaforma organizzativa dei comunisti-anarchici” e dibattito all’epoca, published by the Organizzazione Rivoluzionaria Anarchica, Bari, 1977. English translation by Nestor McNab, 2004. Retrieved on 2"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "luigi-fabbri-about-a-project-for-anarchist-organization.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luigi-fabbri-about-a-project-for-anarchist-organization.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Translator’s introduction        General considerations        Unity and Variety        Some errors: workers’ organizations and anarchist groups This letter, published in the Italian-language New York journal “Il Martello,” is Fabbri’s reaction to the project for an Organizational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists. Fabbri was involved in the discussions on the setting up of an International Anarchist Communist Federation, as part of the “Pensiero e Volontà” Group together with Berneri and Fedeli. This article was published several months after the aborted attempt to set up the international, but it is not clear when the article was actually written. It was with a strong sense of goodwill that I read the project for an anarchist “Organizational Platform” which a group of Russian comrades published last year in Paris and which has been the cause of impassioned debate recently between anarchists from various countries. My first impression was that I was not in disagreement with many points, in fact I found the project to contain many painful, unarguable truths. The whole project breathes such an ardent desire to do something, to work for the good of the cause, that it is quite seductive. All this is certainly of no little merit for the authors of the “Platform,” whose great value is due to another reason — it places under discussion a number of problems inherent to the anarchist movement, to the place of anarchists in the revolution, to anarchist organization in the struggle, and so on. These need to be resolved if anarchism is to continue to provide answers to the growing needs of the struggle and of present-day social life. Despite these favourable observations, however, and unless I am much mistaken, I do not think that the project proposed by the Russian comrades can be accepted by any anarchist organization of any importance since, in my opinion, it contains errors which are of little import should they remain within the realm of the personal (and debatable) opinion of a few comrades, but which could become the cause of serious deviations in the anarchist movement if accepted by the organization and acquire any programmatic value. As a programmatic basis for an organization, the “Platform” is too ideological and too impractical. On a number of problems (such as the class struggle, democracy, the State, the revolutionary transitional period, syndicalism, etc.) it establishes axiomatic points of view, some correct, others not, though opinion on these may be said to vary from comrade to comrade. Unanimous agreement or even wide agreement on these points may be almost impossible (and indeed pointless, as far as practical effects on the organization are concerned). What is important are the concrete and positive objectives of Anarchism which must be realized. The important thing is what we must and what we want to achieve as regards action, independent of the doctrines and ideologies with which our actions can be justified or evaluated. It seems to me that not enough space is dedicated in the “Platform” to this realistic, voluntarist part, if it is to be considered a real programmatic project. But I do not wish to dwell too long on criticism of the “Platform” as a programmatic basis for an organization. I believe that its proponents themselves do not insist on it and are prepared to lay it aside in order to seek a more concrete basis which is better able to unite. Among other things, in fact, one consequence of the “Platform” would be a tendency to exclude from the anarchist organization not only individualists and anti-organizationalists, who could not join for reasons of the very contradiction in terms, but also not a few anarchist-communists and organizationalists, including some (such as myself) who have for many years supported the need for an anarchist organization and have been working towards that goal. There is much in the “Platform” which I find good and which I approve of completely, above all as it se…
