---
title: "A Beautiful Ideal"
author: "Emma Goldman"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/emma-goldman-a-beautiful-ideal"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The lecture which Emma Goldman was to have read before the Edelstadt Social, March 17th, 1908, at Workingmens’ Hall, 12th &amp; Waller Streets, Chicago. But was prevented by Captain Mahoney of Maxwell Street Station with a squad of about fifty police. https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/anarchist-"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "emma-goldman-a-beautiful-ideal.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/emma-goldman-a-beautiful-ideal.epub"
    hosted: false
---

“To the popular mind anarchism stands for destruction; to the more enlightened it stands for an ideal—-a beautiful but thoroughly impracticable ideal. Anarchism does stand for the destruction of the institutions that have been and are keeping the human mind in bondage and that are robbing mankind of the right to the use of the necessities of life. Viewed from the standpoint of cents and dollars, anarchism is truly impracticable, and those whose aim in life is wealth and power will do well to keep out of the anarchist movement. But measured by true value, namely, human character, integrity and real usefulness to society, anarchism is the most practical of all theories—a proposition which I shall attempt to prove. “Anarchism is a theory of human development which lays no less stress than socialism upon the economic or materialistic aspect of social relations; but while granting that the cause of the immediate evil is an economic one we believe that the solution of the social question confronting us today must be wrought out from the equal consideration of the whole of our experience. “To understand society as a whole it behooves the social student to analyze the separate atoms of society—namely, the individual and the motives that prompt every individual and every collective act. What are these motives? “First, the individual instinct, standing for self-expression; second, the social instinct, which inspires collective and social life. These instincts in their latent condition are never antagonistic to each other. “On the contrary, they are dependent upon one another for their complete and normal development. Unfortunately, the organization of society is such that these instincts are being brought into constant antagonism. “Indeed, the history of our experience in thought and action is the record of this strife within each individual and its reflection within each society. “To better illustrate my point, let me give you two cases, representing the extreme development of individual and social instinct. Take Russell Sage, for instance, a man whose individual instincts knew no bounds; a man who, to use a common proverb, did not even observe the ordinary honesty existing among thieves. “I mean that his methods of accomplishing his aim, the accumulation of wealth, were so obscure, so unscrupulous, that even his own colleagues, had little regard for him. “Indeed, it is safe to say that the instinct that prompted the actions of Russell Sage were so antisocial that every one of his steps resulted in crushing out human life and in bringing untold misery and poverty upon those whom his iron heel did not actually crush. “Such a type of a man is possible only in a society based upon inequality, a society that is held together not by natural bonds, but by artificial and arbitrary methods. “Again, let us take a type of human being with the social instinct developed to the extreme—Louise Michelle, the world-renowned anarchist, “Mother Louise,” as she was called by every child of the gutter. Her love for man and beast knew no bounds. “It mattered not whether it was a forlorn kitten or a homeless dog, or a shelterless human being—she gave to all, even the last crust of bread. “Yet to satisfy her great soul she was compelled to deny her individual instinct to the extent of living in great and constant poverty, of exposing herself to many dangers, to imprisonment, and to the heat of New Caledonia, whither she had been sent with many other political prisoners after the Paris Commune of ‘71. “Anarchists insist that conditions must be radically wrong, if human instincts develop to such extremes at the expense of each other. “Anarchism in its scientific and philosophic calculations represents that force in human life which can harmonize and bring into unity the individual and social instincts of the individual and society. “The greatest obstacle in the way of such harmonious blending, are property, or the monopoly of things—the denial of the right of …
