---
title: "Egoism Vol. II. No. 10."
author: "J. William Lloyd, Henry Replogle, Georgia Replogle"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-ii-no-10"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved 02/19/2023 from catalog.hathitrust.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-ii-no-10.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-ii-no-10.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Pointers.      Mount Walt Whitman.      Editorial Opinionlets.      A Communist’s Logic.      A Curious Critic.      Managerial Experience.      Straws in the Breeze.      A Cheap Ranch.      EGOISM’S PRINCIPLES AND PURPOSE. It turns out that Herbert Spencer is capable of the rankest prejudices, just like very ordinary mortals. A letter in “Liberty” from a Mr. Frederick R. Burton, proves that Spencer condemned Proudhon without having read a line of his writings, and, as if to leave no doubt of his unqualified prejudice, declares he never shall. Thus tumble the great before the analytic eye of the unknown layman. After a few weeks’ suspension, “Liberty” is now issued from New York, P. O. Box 1312. It appears in a new dress of larger type, a change that will be hailed with delight by many of its readers. The subscription price has been raised to two dollars a year, while the paper remains a weekly of four pages. Its editor remarks that “few people care to read journals which tell the truth, and as a consequence the privilege is costly and very precious.” Further, he believes that the readers of the paper “sufficiently appreciate it to be willing to pay two dollars annually to help it in its struggle for existence.” Owing to engagements at a distance from the office of publication, Victor Yarros can no longer perform the duties of associate editor, but will contribute with reasonable frequency. John Henry Mackay, author of “The Anarchists,” has discovered the grave of Max Stirner and the house in which he spent his last, days. Mr. Mackay desires to erect a grave stone and memorial tablet, and solicits donations to that purpose. Max Stirner was the Proudhon of Egoism, and a plain monument erected by the hands of strangers would be a very effective way to call attention to the idea, as well as gratifying in the way of passive defiance of a Moralistic cant no less active now than when Stirner wrote. Since EGOISM is the most accented exponent of the philosophy in the world, it would not be unreasonable for Mr. Mackay to expect at least a square lift from its readers. We will contribute something on our own account, and will gladly acknowledge in these columns any amounts that others may forward us to send with it. As an expression of gratitude the mark cannot, of course, reach Stirner, but it gives us an opportunity to say “I,” before men. Ambrose Bierce getteth there to EGOISM’s delight in the following: “I am in receipt of a kind invitation to join the Theosophical Society, whose main object, it appears, is ‘the practical realization Of Universal Brotherhood.’ I must be excused—that is about the last thing that I could wish to bring about. Universal brotherhood, if it means anything, means (for me) a closer relation between me and the rest of the race. As a considerable majority of the rest of the race happens to be made up of knaves, dunces and savages, I am not seeking that kind of relations with it. The Society may tickle its ears with fantastic phrases babbled in gorgeous dreams until it is drunken with words, but I shall not join the debauch. ‘The universal brother, as I know him, has ever manifest in the manner of him an invitation to be slapped ‘on the back and addressed as ‘old feller’—to the which love-feast I am deeply disinclined. In the circumstance that many of us are descended from the same species of apes, I find a sufficiently near approach to universal brotherhood to satisfy my highest and holiest aspirations for spiritual gregariousness.” If the chief of police of this city were a German, his late grand “April fool” on the wrong end of the month might be accounted for on the hypothesis that Germans sometimes get things in an unfamiliar language wrong end before, but since the chief’s name smacks of tubers, no theory save that of magnificent stupidity can account for his action. On the night of April 30 he had every available man on his force concealed about the banks and millionaire residences of the city lyi…
