---
title: "Contributions toward rectifying public opinion concerning revolution in the underdeveloped countries"
author: "Mustapha Khayati"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mustapha-khayati-contributions-toward-rectifying-public-opinion-concerning-revolution-in-the-un"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on July 16, 2007 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mustapha-khayati-contributions-toward-rectifying-public-opinion-concerning-revolution-in-the-un.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mustapha-khayati-contributions-toward-rectifying-public-opinion-concerning-revolution-in-the-un.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The eminently revolutionary role of the bourgeoisie consists in having introduced the economy into history in a decisive and irreversible way. Faithful master of this economy, the bourgeoisie has since its appearance been the effective-though at times unconscious-master of “universal history.” For the first time universal history ceased to be some metaphysical fantasy or some act of the Weltgeist and became a material fact as concrete as the trivial existence of each individual. Since the emergence of commodity production, nothing in the world escapes the implacable development of this neo-Fate, the invisible economic rationality: the logic of the commodity . Totalitarian and imperialist in essence, it demands the entire planet as its terrain and the whole of mankind as its servants. Wherever the commodity is present there are only slaves. To the bourgeoisie’s oppressive coherence in keeping humanity in pre-history , the revolutionary movement--a direct and unintended product of bourgeois capitalist domination--has for more than a cents counterposed the project of a liberatory coherence, the work of each and everyone, the free, conscious intervention in the creation of history . the real abolition of all class division and the suppression of the economy. Wherever it has penetrated--that is, almost everywhere in the world-- the virus of the commodity never stops toppling the most ossified socio-economic structures, allowing millions of human beings to discover through poverty and violence the historical time of the economy. Wherever it penetrates it spreads its destructive principle, dissolves the vestiges of the past and pushes all antagonisms to their extreme. In a word, it hastens social revolution. All the walls of China crumble in its path, and scarcely has it established itself in India when everything around it disintegrates and agrarian revolutions explode in Bombay, in Bengal and in Madras: the pre-capitalist zones of the world accede to bourgeois modernity, but without its material basis. There also, as in the case of the proletariat, the forces that the bourgeoisie has contributed toward liberating, or even creating, are now going to turn against the bourgeoisie and its native servants: the revolution of the underdeveloped is becoming one of the main chapters of modern history. If the problem of revolution in the underdeveloped countries poses itself in a particular way, this is due to the very development of history: In these countries the general economic backwardness--fostered by colonial domination and the social strata that support it--and the underdevelopment of productive forces have impeded the development of socioeconomic structures that would have made immediately practicable the revolutionary theory elaborated in the advanced capitalist societies for more than a century. All these countries, at the time they enter the struggle, lack heavy industry, and the proletariat is far from being the majority class. It is the poor peasantry that assumes that function. The various national liberation movements appeared well after the rout of the workers movement resulting from the defeat of the Russian revolution, which right from its victory turned into a counterrevolution in the service of a bureaucracy claiming to be communist. They have thus suffered--either consciously or with false consciousness-- from all the defects and weaknesses of that generalized counterrevolution; and with the general backwardness added to this, they have been unable to overcome any of the limits imposed on the defeated revolutionary movement. And it is precisely because of this defeat that the colonized and semi-colonized countries have had to fight imperialism by themselves. But because they have fought only imperialism and on only a part of the total revolutionary terrain, they have only partially driven it out. The oppressive regimes that have installed themselves wherever national liberation revolutions believed themselves victorious…
