---
title: "After the Fall"
author: "CrimethInc."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-after-the-fall"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Analysis of the Events of September 11th, 2001"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "crimethinc-after-the-fall.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/crimethinc-after-the-fall.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A New Morning Breaks…        And The Sun Still Rises Over the Western World        Solidarity Forever – with Exceptions?        If Their Explosion is Their Message…        What is Our Message?        This Moment Despair Ends — and Tactics Begin        One Solution — Revolution The CrimethInc Ex-Workers Ex-Collective Revolutionary Task Force on Terrorism: When I laid down my weary head to rest on Monday, September 10, 2001, I felt that I had a fairly clear idea of where the anarchist project was heading in the next few years and of what my part in that project was to be. We were picking up momentum, patiently building the infrastructure that we hoped would ultimately facilitate the system’s demise and occasionally confronting it, overtly by day and covertly by night. We did the quiet work, built quiet armies, and went largely unnoticed while the powers that be largely slept — so fat, lazy, senile and over-confident that it really did seem like maybe we could just evade them until we could bring them down. When I woke up Tuesday morning to the twin towers falling and the Pentagon burning, it became quickly apparent that this trajectory was no longer realistic. This unexpected development has understandably thrown most of us for a loop — to say the least — but we need to accustom ourselves to the fact that the times have changed somewhat. We need to realign ourselves to this new situation, and we need to do it quick or we risk quickly becoming irrelevant as all of the ground we have won recently is lost in the flood of the coming war, the likely recession, and the quite plausible specter of nuclear fucking armageddon. For better or for worse the new situation opens up possibilities that were not present before. If we can move fast we may get somewhere — soon. In that spirit, this here is a modest proposal from some individuals affiliated with the CrimethInc. Ex-Worker’s Collective: A few humble suggestions as to where to go, where we have been, and what is to be done from here. For starters, expressing unabashed jubilation or even tacit approval of the hijackings is an exceedingly bad idea for a variety of reasons. There is absolutely no way to get around the fact that over six thousand people died horrifically — “disappeared” as they would say in Latin America — leaving many thousands more parents, children, friends and relations to pick up the pieces or the lack thereof. If we allow ourselves to gloss over this simply because it’s “cool” or “exciting” that the Pentagon is finally on fire we render ourselves completely alien to almost anyone with any sense and rightly so. We do the State a very great favor in the process by fulfilling every crude caricature that they create of us. This is unwise tactically, if for no other reason. We don’t need to impress each other with facile displays of militancy. We should recognize that we are in some degree of danger right now and act accordingly. To pick a fight with the government at this point, while remaining blithely oblivious to the fact that we are currently unable to win it, would demonstrate a clear inability to understand power and the fact that right now we have very little currently — at least in the domain of physical warfare. Make no mistake, we are preparing for war. The day will come when we will have to fight it and there is no reason to set it off before we can prevail. In the meantime, it will be important to remember that the system’s not just made of bricks; it’s mostly made of people. The demons of domination and abuse which plague our relationships with each other will not be exorcized by destroying buildings — however odious — and to massacre people at will is to contribute to the problem. The type of wholesale slaughter that we saw on September 11 th is a clear expression of an authoritarian arrogance that is the exclusive province of hierarchs, archons, and ideologues. The war that our self-proclaimed leaders have begun to wage will be an even clearer expre…
