---
title: "Anti-civ Gatherings: Reports from “Green Anarchist”"
author: "Rusty Nail, Anonymous, Green Anarchist"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-anti-civ-gatherings-reports-from-green-anarchist"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "from Green Anarchist #71–74, 2004 Retrieved on January 1, 2005 from www.greenanarchist.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-anti-civ-gatherings-reports-from-green-anarchist.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-anti-civ-gatherings-reports-from-green-anarchist.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Anticivilization Gathering: Weaving a Cobweb April 30 th — May 3 rd      Review of “Green Anarchy in the UK — Gathering of the Tribes” Held at Bilston Glen Protest Site, 1–4 JULY, 2004      What a Load of Crap: The Anticivilisation Encuentro, Pyrenees, April ‘04 by Rusty Nail      The Earth First! Summer Gathering, 4 th — 8 th August 2004 — Lincolnshire      Thoughts on the Total Liberation Fest. January 10–11, 2004. Erie, Pennsylvania.      A Look at the Feral Visions Gathering. Uncivilizing Physically, Mentally, and Spiritually. By Felonious Skunk This year’s anti-civilisation gathering suffered slightly from less numbers than the previous year’s gathering. Still there were people from a range of European countries and different groups and projects. Last year’s gathering was at a large squat called “Can Masdeu” in the suburbs of Barcelona, but this year the organisers had opted for a campsite called “Solell de les Codines” further north near Montesquiu, a village in the area of Osona, in North of Catalunya. It’s possible that the concrete manicured campsite, relatively close to a large road was not quite the ideal venue for a gathering of civilizationresistors, and this may have had a detrimental effect on the discourse. However, it seems preferable in some ways to the disputes that occurred at last years gathering due to the antagonism of some of the inhabitants of Can Masdeu, a squat that is notorious for it’s liberal politics within Barcelona. Squatters there seemed happy to cook and feed those that attended the gathering, but not to have them in the house and to charge extortionate amounts for what was in effect free food that had been foraged from bins. One of the suggested aims of this years gathering was to build some kind of network, or to ‘Weave a Cobweb’ of groups and individuals in Europe in order to aid better communication and solidarity. Unfortunately this failed to happen, outside of the more informal networking outside of meetings. Discussion ranged from ‘New Technologies of Control’ through to debates around tactics used to fight for earth and animal liberation, with a small minority present whom expressed a distinctly non-combative and wholly moralistic approach. This minority seemed to have little analysis of power relations, there answer to civilizations assault appeared to be to go off and grow there own organic vegetables somewhere so as to make a ‘positive’ effort. Enough said really! This isolationist perspective seems typical of those that seek a ‘selfsufficient’ way of life and fail to realize that this is not possible — we are surrounded, something Ted Kaczynski soon discovered. Others were acutely aware of the moribund nature of the ‘official’ anarchist movement. . One participant stated ‘the anarchists and afraid of anarchy’.’ Something I couldn’t agree with more. There seemed to be much interest in the ‘Solidarity South Pacific’ campaign, which someone gave a brief presentation about and people from Italy told of the growing animal liberation movement there, where actions against the fur industry are ongoing. The film ‘Surplus’ was shown, an anticonsumerism film, to some extent sympathetic to the critique of civilization and which features John Zerzan as well as someone from ‘AdBusters’. Although the meetings were at times hard to follow due to lack of structure and of course the translation is hard work, it was good to meet up with people from across Europe where an interest in the critique of civilization seems to be growing more and more. With the ‘Green Anarchy in the UK’ gathering here in the UK in July as well as a second gathering in the US later this year it seems hopeful that more and more people are showing an interest in ideas that take on the totality. First of all I’d like to thank everyone for coming and helping out to make the gathering happen! I had a great time myself and everyone else seemed to enjoy it as well. I’d especially like to thank the people who turned up a coupl…
