---
title: "A Side View of Ikkyu’s “Insanity”"
author: "Ichikawa Hakugen"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/a-side-view-of-ikkyu-s-insanity"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved and Translation finished on 3/6/2025 from https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/ibk1952/19/1/19_1_59/_pdf/-char/ja"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "a-side-view-of-ikkyu-s-insanity.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/a-side-view-of-ikkyu-s-insanity.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1.        2.        3.        4.        5.        6.        7.        Supplementary Explanation          a.          b. In Ikkyu Sojun’s anthology of poems, the word “furyu” (風流) (henceforth, Elegance) can be seen innumerable times (152) with various meanings, while the word “fukyou” (風狂) (henceforth, Insanity) can only be found in two places — “An Insane Visitor Stirs Up a Raging Wind” (風狂の狂客、狂風を起す) (156) and “False Poems, Brilliantly Drunk, I Am Insane” (佯歌爛酔我れ風狂) (119) — words concerning Ikkyu himself. However, we can examine exceedingly numerous matters on Insanity. Sidebar: According to “Crazy Swarm” (狂雲集), collated by Mr. Toshiko Ito. The Arabic numerals in the quotations are from the same book. The “Self-Admonition Collection” (自戒集) was not included. In Ikkyu’s own case, Insanity was often the equivalent of Elegance (in the broad sense), while in other cases Elegance was a particular orientation that was developed towards (in the narrow sense). We can take Ikkyu’s Insanity in the broad definition of madness as a way of life that goes beyond the customs of worldly people, and in that sense, the framework of what is considered normal, that make Elegance and Insanity equivalent to each other, for example, “Pampas grass shoes and bamboo cane of 3000 cognitive objects, staying on the water eating in the wind for 20 years” (芒鞋竹杖三千界、水宿風飡二十年) (117), “The vedana’s purpose is the eating in the wind once again staying on the water” (受用す風飡また水宿)(169), “50 years of being a straw hat-sedge cap visitor” (五十年来簑笠の客) (574), “The beauty of the rivers and mountains, my rice boiled in tea with sake, one laughs their whole life reciting poetry in midwinter” (江山風月、我が茶飯、自ら咲う一生吟味寒し) (204). Although Insanity in the narrow sense is not uniform, here I would like to mention some notable ones such as “Another journey inside the Licentious Monk” (来往す酒肆淫坊の中) (156), “swimming through the Licentious Monk again” (魚行酒肆又淫坊) (85), “Drinking and sex, and poetry that is also licentiousness”(酒淫色淫詩亦淫) (373), “Many cups of brilliant drunkenness, women’s sexuality and male sexuality” (欄酔多盃女色勇巴（男色）) (574), and (淫坊興半ばにして尚勇巴) “Even in the middle of the Licentious Monk, there too is male sexuality” (620). Let’s call the former type “Eating in the wind staying on the water Insanity” (風飡水宿の風狂) and the latter type “Barroom Licentious Monk Insanity” (酒肆淫坊の風狂). At this point, let us attempt to investigate the perspective (測面的) of Barroom Licentious Monk Insanity. Comment: Romance and sexual relations with the blind female attendant Mori are excluded from the category of Insanity. This is because it is not Barroom Licentious Monk Insanity. Ikkyu’s own Insanity was a humorous expression of self-reliance/self-mockery that was contemplative of the bitterness of self-reflection, and at times a form of play within the pleasures of a pious life. This often overlaps with Elegance. And so Elegance is tinged with extraversion and aggressiveness developing in a particular way, while Insanity in the narrow sense is abrupt, though skillfully. The main part of Insanity in this category is the Barroom Licentious Monk Insanity. What I would like to draw your attention to here are 2 clauses one “abrupt” (転) and the other “binding” (結) in the gathas “Taken Cognitive Objects, Un-Taken People”(奪境不奪人) and “An Elegant Friend with pampas grass shoes and bamboo sticks, A bent wooden bed is Zen’s fame and fortune” (芒鞋竹杖風流の友、曲椂木床名利の禅) (14) respectively. To define the abrupt and binding clauses: they are movement toward antithetical targets without tension, it is a mistake to oppose Elegance and fame and fortune, fame and fortune regards Elegance hiding its frustration. In this case, the original meaning of “the ancestors’ way is a reverberating breeze” is connected to the traditions of Bodhidharma, the Sixth Patriarch, Linji, Kyodo, Shuho Myocho, etc. Therefore, this Elegance becomes a lament or fury, as in “Eating in the wind staying on the water, no one has written about it for twenty yea…
