---
title: "Direct (In)Action"
author: "Luke Ray Di Marco Campbell"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luke-ray-di-marco-campbell-direct-in-action"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "State Suppression of Community Organising"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "luke-ray-di-marco-campbell-direct-in-action.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/luke-ray-di-marco-campbell-direct-in-action.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Food Not Bombs Approach        The Glasgow Chapter: ‘No Referrals, No Means Testing, No Worries’        The Struggle Continues More than twelve years on from the global economic crash, across nations the world over, the state continues to not only abdicate responsibility for the ongoing social ills and economic hardships so many ensure, but, as witnessed this week, a significant proportion of those in positions of power actively suppress community-driven efforts to support those around them. Sometime between late Thursday 1 st and early Friday 2 nd July 2021, a representative from Glasgow City Council removed a community pantry — stocked with ‘ baby formula, pasta, nappies, tomato sauce, sanitary products, water, jam, beans, toothpaste, curries, shampoo and baby wipes ’ — from Queen’s Park. Initiated by the Glasgow chapter of Food Not Bombs, the Community pantry was a small antidote to sustained state inaction. The pantry fridge was positioned permanently in the park due to public events blocking off the group’s usual weekly stall area, though progressing towards a constant presence is a logical step in creating radical solutions to food poverty (as well as the ongoing erasure of freely accessible community spaces). Though community panties aren’t unique with an increasing number of community organisations running them out of their respective centres — intended as spaces for self-service rather than a food bank which, usually, relies on a referral / food voucher process — actions like including a notebook that allowed people an opportunity to make specific dietary or product request demonstrates an ambition to further recognise the humanity of those in positions of economic or social marginalisation. A second stall, based in Glasgow’s west end , commenced in late June, whilst the group members previously pitched up to support the Palestinian solidarity demonstration in May . The members also have emphasised their outreach that ensures food reaches others who might not be able to attend the stalls directly. Since 1981, an estimated one thousand groups Food Not Bombs have emerged boasting varying degrees of association with the original U.S. body that emerged in the aftermath of anti-nuclear power demonstration in Massachusetts (U.S.). Premised on the reality that: ‘The amount of money spent by governments on weapons of war could feed the hungry many, many times over, but instead it is spent on violence, creating yet more hunger. Meanwhile the capitalist system our food is produced in results in vast quantities of perfectly edible, good food being thrown out, rather than eaten, despite the many people who need it.’ Chapters worldwide operate as volunteer-led community-organised interventions supporting mutual aid via direct action. Though far from all Food Not Bomb chapters would state themselves to be anarchist collectives, hopefully it’s slipped few that the now removed pantry fridge was explicitly labelled as an ‘anarchist community pantry’. For decades, many through the political spectrum — including plenty from ‘the left’ — have demonised and vilified anarchism, waxing lyrical through the numerous cliches of chaos and disorder when anarchism, in its sincere sense, is nothing of the sort. With the exception of anarcho-capitalism — an approach touted by the likes of Murray Rothbard and Patrik Schumacher — which shouldn’t be counted anywhere within the same spectrum (fuck, even the mess of a right wing anti-statist attitude has more in common with genuine anarchism than this U.S. free market libertarianism), anarchism is the belief that we, the people, are able to better govern ourselves through direct engagement, voluntary association, care, and mutual aid than a political elite and careerist class. Given the shitty state of affairs we’ve, borderline, always been under through representative politics, it’s pretty hard to argue otherwise. One need only access the thousands of texts available at The Anarchist Library…
