---
title: "DSA LSC FAQ"
author: "DSA Libertarian Socialist Caucus"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dsa-libertarian-socialist-caucus-dsa-lsc-faq"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 25 February 2024 from dsa-lsc.org."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "dsa-libertarian-socialist-caucus-dsa-lsc-faq.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dsa-libertarian-socialist-caucus-dsa-lsc-faq.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       TL;DR What do you believe in?        Are you all anarchists?        Do you all hate electoral politics?        Why are you in DSA and not in another organization?        A brief history of the LSC:        How does the LSC make decisions and work together?        How do I get involved?        What is the DSA National Political Committee / Steering Committee?        What is a caucus?        What are libertarians? Are you like those libertarians?        What is dual power?        What is horizontalism?        Have you read The Tyranny of Structurelessness?        What is prefigurative politics?        Important LSC docs:        Podcast interviews: A great place to start would be to read our statement Dual Power: A Strategy to Build Socialism in Our Time . In short, we believe by building directly-democratic institutions outside of the existing capitalist State, we can create a situation of dual power in which those institutions can engage in ever larger confrontations with the ruling class—and ultimately a contest for legitimacy against the institutions of capitalist society. For more information about our values, the LSC Founding Statement from the 2017 DSA National Convention is a good resource. We operate on three shared principles we see as inseparable from libertarian socialism: Freedom, Solidarity, and Democracy. No. The LSC is a caucus with a wide range of leftist tendencies and we consider ourselves a big tent within DSA’s multi-tendency big tent. We are home to hard anarchists, anarcho-communists, syndicalists, municipalists, communalists as well as Marxists, situationists, general anti-authoritarians and more. We welcome anyone willing to work together now to create the world we wish to see. No. There are diverse positions on this within the caucus, and in fact, some LSC members have been or are currently involved in electoral work, including successful ballot initiatives and candidate campaigns. We do object to pushing of electoral work at the expense of everything else and the presumption that electoralism on its own is a viable path to socialism. Some of us are not personally interested in electoral work at all, but are still glad we're comrades with those who are and expect there will continue to be space for them to do this work within DSA. The LSC did create an addendum for DSA's National Electoral Strategy in which we argue: Socialist electoral politics must prioritize direct, participatory democracy and encourage existing local neighborhood institutions to democratize or build new institutions where needed. These institutions can exercise a dual power, contesting the power of the capitalist State while simultaneously generating local, accountable leadership that can become candidates for local office with a solid base of support. Existing institutions such as block associations have large material impacts on the everyday lives of Americans. Successful socialist movements are built block-by-block, neighborhood-by-neighborhood, and are intimately tied to the communities they are organizing. Transferring power to the local community should be a top priority for a DSA local. We are each in DSA for our own reasons. First, DSA is doing a variety of great work around the country to which we are proud to contribute our efforts. Also, we take DSA's multi-tendency commitment very seriously and wish to see it nutured into the future. We cherish DSA's local chapter autonomy where many people can experiment with what works based on local conditions, organize around what they're passionate about, and build camaraderie with people of different political tendencies. DSA is the largest socialist organization in the United States since the Communist Party of the 1930's and we believe there is a welcoming space in DSA for libertarian socialists—we truly believe in a socialism that is radically democratic. Individuals might be this tendency or that tendency, but in the end, we are all socialists . The LSC was founded at the …
