---
title: "Bloom Theory"
author: "Tiqqun"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tiqqun-bloom-theory"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Alternatively titled as Theory of Bloom. Retrieved on May 29, 2010 from bloom.jottit.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tiqqun-bloom-theory.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tiqqun-bloom-theory.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     At this hour of the night      Who Are You Really?      Kairos [the right moment]      Stimmung [mood/tone]      Mundus Est Fabula [the world is a fiction]      ωζμη [fragrance]      “Everyone is more foreign to himself than to anyone else.”      Ens Realissimum [the most real being]      The Most Disturbing Guest      A Small Chronicle of Disaster      Uprooting      Somewhere Out of the World      The Loss of Experience      The Metropolises of Separation      A Genealogy of Bloom-Consciousness      The Replacement of the “Worker” Type by the Bloom Figure      The World of the Authoritarian Commodity      Militarization of Disaster, Concentration of Domination      Poor Substantiality      Bloom is the Positive Reality Pointed Towards by the Empire of Simulacra      Sua Cuique Persona [to each his own mask]      The Inner Man      Let Us Share Our Poverty, Not Our Misery!      Agapê [non-erotic, benevolent love]      I Would Prefer Not To      Tiqqun      Mene, Tekel, Peres.      The Unavowable Enemy      “Because what crime and madness objectivize is the absence of a transcendental homeland.”      The Possessed of Nothingness      Paradoxes of Sovereignty      The Era of Pure Guilt      Homo Sacer [sacred/accursed man] Mr. Bloom watched curiously, kindly the lithe black form. Clean to see: the gloss of her sleek hide, the white button under the butt of her tail, the green flashing eyes. He bent down to her, his hands on his knees. “Milk for the pussens,” he said. “Mrkgnao!” the cat cried. They call them stupid. They understand what we say better than we understand them. James Joyce, Ulysses The great watchmen are dead. Doubtless THEY killed them. The weak glow of their solitary stubbornness disturbed the party of sleep too much. That, at least, is what we think, we guess — we who’ve come so late — in light of the perplexity that their name still stirs up at certain times. Every living trace of what they did and were has been erased, it seems, by the maniacal obstinacy of resentment. In the end, all that’s left of them for this world is a handful of dead images that it still haloes with the villainous satisfaction of having conquered those who were better than it is. So here we are, orphans of grandeur, marooned in a world of ice where no fires light the horizon. Our questions have to remain unanswered, the old ones assure us; then they say, all the same: “ there’s never been a blacker night for intelligence .” The pretty, snow-blanketed countryside slips fast across the window. It won’t be long now until the trip between V. and R., which in the old days would’ve been a matter of weeks, will be over. For less than an hour, you’ve been the occupant of some seat or another in one of the twenty identical cars of this high speed train, one of so many. The regular — doubtless optimal — arrangement of the seats spreads out in an abstract harmony of gentle neon. The train follows along its rails, and in this train car, so seamlessly in harmony with the idea of order, it seems that human reality itself travels along invisible rails. A clean and polite indifference inhabits the space that separates you from the lady sitting in the seat next to you. Neither of you will have your trip disturbed by the superfluous need to even say a word, much less strike up a conversation. That would disturb your distraction, and, in the case of your neighbor, her applied study of the feminine press (“how to sleep with a guy without him knowing,” “soft flirting,” “gifts with meaning ,” “is he a good lay?” “who are you REALLY?” etc.). And when her cell phone rings, the young woman doesn’t think it necessary to get up, either: “ hello? ... listen, what do you mean you’re not there? ... are you shitting me? ... listen, I’ve been stuck with the kids for the past three weekends, I work all week, and it’s already a bitch finding time to live, man... no, no, no, I just can’t, that’s all... deal with it, it’s not my problem... everyone’s gotta have their …
