---
title: "A Letter"
author: "Gabriel Pombo Da Silva"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gabriel-pombo-da-silva-a-letter"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=22046&gt;. Retrieved on 09/06/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gabriel-pombo-da-silva-a-letter.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gabriel-pombo-da-silva-a-letter.epub"
    hosted: false
---

‘..while there is a lower class, I am in it, and while there is a criminal element I am of it, and while there is a soul in prison, I am not free.’ — Eugene Debs Comrades! Today I’m in high spirits (you know our life is not a straight line, nor constant, or static…), and those who know me personally know that I have a pretty black a sense of humour (what ‘scandalizes’ others makes me smile, etc.) almost cynically (especially when it comes to talking about/describing facts to do with the ‘Law’, ‘Rights’, the ‘Authorities’, etc.); because these are ‘things’ that I can’t take seriously (even though my life is wrapped up in all that), no matter how serious these ‘things’ are. So I’m writing informally with a smile on my face (even if I’m talking about serious ‘things’) because a sense of humour is one of the ‘things’ that has always kept me ‘struggling on’. I can’t help feeling surprised when I hear/see parlour politicians filling their mouths with words/concepts such as ‘we live by the Rule of law’, ‘we are all equal before the law’, etc. The ‘Spanish Trademark’ (as they now call it) doesn’t know what Democracy is (considering that I’m not democratic either); the Law is a ‘mino-cracy’ and only serves the interests of the caste (I like this about the caste, because that’s what we’ve got in this Country), and those of us who don’t laugh at their jokes are all ‘anti-system’. Does anyone have any doubt about it? Whoever who fills their mouth with these words in this country is a ‘petty thief’ (or a potential one) because ‘common people’ –without even being or declaring themselves ‘anarchist’ – know that the business-political caste (yes, that of the ‘revolving doors’, the Filesa and Malesa cases, the Gal, the Gürtel case, the ‘black cards’ case, the ERE [1] , etc. etc. etc.) has provided all the judicial rackets (C.G.P.J., T.S., T.C. [2] , etc. etc.) with a bunch of ‘scribblers’ who when ‘judging’ (or ‘investigating’, ‘indicting’, ‘catching’) one of their own, go in one door and out through another… and that the Banks, energy and telecommunication companies (not to mention building, transport, rubbish, etc. cartels), the IMF and the ‘European Consortium’ can lavish plenty of money… so much that they can buy everyone and silence the majorities. The worst thing is realizing how this endemic corruption leaves the most fucked over ones homeless, deprived of higher education, hungry and helpless… I know there’s ‘nothing new’ in this, but never has all the ‘wheeling and dealing’ of these reprobates been as widely known as now, in the ‘communication’ era… nevertheless the Political Parties, the worst thieves and plunderers, the most ‘democraticidal’ and liberticidal in this country, continue to appear in ‘polls’… if it wasn’t for the fact that I see so many poor illiterate, marginal and sick people dying (and rotting) all around me, I’d cynically declare: we’ve got the politicians we deserve. But do we really deserve this? Can we only get to the level of ‘indignatos’? Can we only hope (and strive) for a Messiah, a Political Party to ‘save’ us? I’m amused by their firm call to the ‘Constitution’ (and to their ‘anti-Constitutionalist’ adversaries), ‘Democracy’, respect for ‘Judicial Decisions’ (provided that they don’t concern them, of course), ‘ongoing investigations’, a supposed difference that should separate a ‘defendant’ from one ‘under investigation’; and ever since the hand of the Law caught Rodrigo Rato (you know, the great economist!) by the scruff of the neck, they’ve been talking of ‘prisoners’ Right to reputation and respect’… Since when does this country care for prisoners’ reputations and respect? What prisoners? If we had any courage and pride left we should set fire to all the Institutions (with them inside) in this country and all over Europe! Sorry, my nihilist self is coming out here… or rather, not ‘sorry’ take note of it… Where was I? Oh yes, respecting prisoners! Yes, I’ve seen how even Bárcenas [3] , in his few months h…
