---
title: "Egoism Vol. I. No. 12."
author: "James L. Walker, William S. Bell, Henry Replogle, Georgia Replogle"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-i-no-12"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved 02/19/2023 from catalog.hathitrust.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-i-no-12.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/georgia-and-henry-replogle-egoism-vol-i-no-12.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Pointers.      One Year Old.      Co-operative Schemes.      The Philosophy of Egoism.        IX.      Wakemanized Science.      Will it be Only a Change of Superstitions.      Mr. Pentecost Strikes Bottom.      Managerial Experience.      EGOISM’S PRINCIPLES AND PURPOSE. Although EGOISM was properly due on the first of each month it has seldom been out before the middle. The coming year it will not be due until the fifteenth. We acknowledge the receipt of 50 cents from Prof. J. H. Cook for the funeral fund of J. W. Cooper, mentioned in the preceding number of this paper. This is the only response to that appeal. Surer the poor are the lone friends of the poor. In “Liberty” of April 4, Victor Yarros in correcting Bellamy, favors its readers with an imaginary conversation between a Nationalist and an Evolutionist which subtly exposes in easily comprehended language the vague generalizing and erroneous conclusions of these socialistic amateurs. Nationalists should read the article, and permit themselves no longer to be exposed to the ridicule of more patient thinkers. Alfred B. Westrup has published a new edition of “Citizens’ Money” with an appendix consisting of the “Mutual Bank Propaganda: Its Declaration of Principles and Object.” This makes it more desirable than our edition. It is neat and well-printed, contains 27 large pages and sells for 10 cents. We hope this edition of the excellent pamphlet will not be left on Mr. Westrup’s hands, as much of our edition has on ours. Pamphlets can do no work so long as they remain on the publisher’s shelves. Address The Mutual Bank Propaganda, 343 Michigan Ave. Chicago, Ills., or this paper. The advertisement of “Fair Play” on the seventh page of this number is dead. That paper has suspended publication. Its publishers state that it has never received more than fifty per cent of the amount required to publish it. Aside from all considerations of sympathy for its publishers as friends having to abandon it, we are very sorry to see “Fair Play” stop. Being partly devoted to anti-theological propaganda and circulating among that class of innovators, it was enabled to carry Anarchistic ideas into places where exclusively Anarchistic papers never go. Its unexpired subscriptions will be filled by “Liberty,” of Boston. Its editor has also joined that paper’s staff and takes the field in the West as traveling salesman for it and Mr. Tucker’s other publications. The uncle of his nephew George Macdonald, has just translated and published Zola’s latest novel, “Money,” and says concerning it: “So boundless is my admiration for Zola and his works that I cannot bring myself to write soberly on the subject. For this reason I have asked Mr. Yarros, who is not yet as crazy as I am in this direction, to Write an article for the next number on Zola’s latest novel, “Money,” which I have just translated and published. Meantime I congratulate myself upon my self-control in confining myself to the moderate remark that “Money” is perhaps the greatest novel yet written by the greatest novelist that has yet lived.” We are reading it and do not wonder at the enthusiasm of a person even so cool as Mr. Tucker usually is. When we have finished it more of our impressions will be given the habitually indifferent reader. Those who have faith in Mr. Tucker’s judgment, and a dollar, will immediately send the latter to his address, Box 3366, Boston, and get a copy in cloth, or 50 cents of it for one in paper cover. The case of the New Orleans massacre furnishes another illustration of the weakness and indifference of government in protecting life and securing justice. In the first place it allowed the prisoners, unarmed and defenseless, to be butchered by a crazy mob, and now dares not or cares not to bring it to trial as it would a helpless individual, if indeed it does so at all. The “investigation” will be a covering up and an apologizing expedition for the community instead of an attempt to find and dispose of t…
