---
title: "Anarchists Getting Ourselves Together"
author: "James Herod"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-herod-anarchists-getting-ourselves-together"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Proposal"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "james-herod-anarchists-getting-ourselves-together.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-herod-anarchists-getting-ourselves-together.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Name        Points of Unity        Purpose of the Network        Structure of Decision Making        Projects        Membership in Groups        Affiliation with the Network        Expulsion from the Network        Discussion Northeast Network of Anarchist Groups (1) We assert that human beings are inter-subjective creatures, and that therefore the words "individual" and "society" misconstrue and inaccurately describe the reality of our situation and lives. This means, among other things, that there is no such thing as an "autonomous individual." Consequently, anarchy cannot be conceived as an aggregate of such individuals. It also means that "freedom" cannot be an attribute of an individual but only of a social order (that is, a pattern of social relations). Freedom (and even individuality) can only be a social achievement. (2) In general, we picture anarchy as a world full of autonomous communities, in which people control all aspects of their lives at all levels. This is sometimes called (rather awkwardly and even confusedly) a self-managed society. The core social forms through which our autonomy will find expression are directly democratic assemblies in our neighborhoods, in our projects (workplaces), and in our extended households. These will be the basic decision-making bodies under anarchy. This means that our new society (anarchy) will be horizontally organized, not hierarchically. (3) We fight for the abolition of capitalism, the state, and god, and for the establishment of a social order without wage-slavery, markets, money, commodities, classes, or war. (4) We are committed to the principle of direct democracy, and reject and will campaign vigorously against representative government. By direct democracy we mean decision-making in assemblies through face-to-face discussion, deliberation, and voting, and an association of such assemblies built up through negotiated agreements (pacts, treaties), not through federation (or confederation) using delegates. The term has also been widely used in recent years to refer to referendums and recalls, which is an unfortunate restriction and weakening of the concept, which originally referred to direct participatory democracy, as in a town meeting. We stick to the original meaning of the term. (5) We reject the principle of simple majority rule (half plus one), in favor of decision-making procedures which achieve the greatest possible majority on any issue (usually called, inaccurately, consensus decision making). (6) We stand opposed to all forms of domination and discrimination based on race, gender, sexual orientation, age (and any other personal attribute -- personal beauty, ethnicity, intelligence -- if irrelevant to the issue at hand). All persons are equal as to rights. (7) We are opposed to the destruction of the environment and the abuse of animals. (8) We make a distinction between us anarchists organizing amongst ourselves as anarchists, for the purposes of agitation, and the social forms that will be needed to constitute anarchy. Organizations (or networks) of anarchists are still one step removed from anarchy itself. For anarchy itself, we will need social forms to enable us to self-management our social relations generally across society. To agitate for anarchy, as defined above. Within Our Groups Decision making within our groups is based on face-to-face discussion and voting. This is generally known as direct democracy or participatory democracy. Since these groups have no power (nor desire) to impose decisions on those in the group who do not agree with them, procedures must be adopted which ensure that the largest possible majority will be reached on any issue, and on securing the willingness to go along by those who disagree. Such procedures are generally known as 'consensus decision making' (a misnomer actually). Decisions will never be delegated to a decision-making elite (elected officers, for example). (See note below for further discussion.) Amongst…
