---
title: "Burning the Borders"
author: "Guta, Warzone Distro"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/warzone-distro-guta-burning-the-borders"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Total Liberation & Individualist, Nihilist Perspectives Within the Colonized Territory Known as Mexico"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "warzone-distro-guta-burning-the-borders.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/warzone-distro-guta-burning-the-borders.epub"
    hosted: false
---

This interview between Warzone Distro & Guta – one of the organizers of EININPAACF, or Encuentro Internacional de Practicas Anarquicas y Antiauthoritarias Contra las Fronteras, which in english translates to annual international gathering of anarchist and anti-authoritarian practices against borders - took place a few days before and after the event. This event, which took place January 25 – 27 in Tijuana, Mexico, reflects a new emergence of individualist, anarcho-nihilist perspectives influenced not only by the current techno-industrial world in general, but also by the perceived failings of leftism experienced by anarchists living in so-called mexico. Warzone Distro: To start off with, could you give us some background on what inspired the creation of EININPAACF? Guta : Well, the beginning of ENINPAACF came from just thinking and reflecting on the absence of these kind of meetings, which have the function of having face-to-face communication. Among only close friends, for a long time we’ve had conversations about individualism and nihilism that relate to experiences that we’ve had over the years, both before entering the Anarquíca movement and once already inside. Some of those experiences come from ruptures with Zapatismo or non profits, or in my case I come from a family whose political tendency was Marxist, Leninist and Zapatista, and when I was younger I followed them. With time I abandoned them, because the role of being a victim and sometimes doing things just to be a welfare worker never appealed to me, and then I saw that the same feelings were also held by my close friends, and well we talked about the disappointments we lived through. Of course we all have different positions, but we always have certain threads that weave us in complicity. And that's how the ENINPAACF started. Then I met some more people and I set up some activities with them last year, I didn't know them very well, but I really wanted to come back after years of being away from anarchist activities to see what was new in the public sphere. Those actions went very well, and so I thought it was a good idea to propose this meeting. I consider it important, this impulse of doing things with that passion that encourages you to continue, no matter the difficulties or if there are only a few people involved or if there are no spaces where to develop those things. It is something that has already happened a few times during my participation in the Mauricio Morales Squatted Social Center in 2016 and I could see it coming now. So with that I tried to keep myself with a stoic character to keep going. However, I did not count on that effort quickly spreading to creating the meeting, plus I tried to use all possible tools; talking face to face with people I thought were interested, I went to events to meet people and invite, I sent emails to accomplices from other territories and in short, I see that it was deflagrating individual will. Also something I have learned over the years is that the fewer people involved, the greater the capacity to get things done. I guess, it is not for everyone to not to let the crowds seduce us, I think that in the end, we have always been taught that everything is better when there is quantity, even that it is better to delegate your will to some entity that manages the wills, let's call it State, political parties, unions, dad, mom, uncles, aunts, grandmothers and so on and so on and so forth. Also something important to mention, I knew that the most difficult thing was/is to crack the language barrier, something that is necessary, because all that information full of experiences that stirs in the territory occupied by the mexican state is/was/will be necessary to break those borders. In fact that is why this project is said to be against the borders. Someone proposed to me to keep the event limited to within the border. But I thought it would be good to begin to delimit and position it against borders, from a tendency of direc…
