---
title: "The anarcho-syndicalist movement in China in 1910s and 1920s"
author: "Vadim Damier"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vadim-damier-the-anarcho-syndicalist-movement-in-china-in-1910s-and-1920s"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From: Vadim Damier. The Forgotten International: The International anarcho-syndicalist movement between two world wars (in Russian). Vol.1. Moscow, 2006. P.220–221, 232–239, 585–591, 593–594 Retrieved on 4th February 2021 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "vadim-damier-the-anarcho-syndicalist-movement-in-china-in-1910s-and-1920s.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/vadim-damier-the-anarcho-syndicalist-movement-in-china-in-1910s-and-1920s.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The history of anarchism and anarcho-syndicalism in the East is generally little known outside of the region. The few foreign historians who addressed this topic were unanimous in stressing big difficulties in it study. The main factor here is perhaps the fact that the Eastern libertarians did not fit into the framework of those myths and beliefs by which the “winners of history” in this region of the globe (liberal democracy, on the one hand, and the ideology of the Communist Parties, on the other) sought legitimize their victory [1] . However, the studies show that the anarchists and anarcho-syndicalists in many Asian countries were at the beginnings of the socialist movement, and they were often not inferior in strength and influence than their Marxist rivals or even sometimes surpassed them. They were able to leaving their specific and very vivid mark on the workers movement in their countries. The reason for this should probably be sought in the special nature of the Eastern societies of the early twentieth century: in the bitter resistance of communitarian social and ideological structures to capitalism and to ruthless invasion of a capitalist — industrialist modernization. Anarchist ideas were here (more than anywhere else) the banner of resistance. “Nul doute que l‘aspiration kropotkinienne à un communalisme décentralisé unissant le champ, l‘usine et l‘atelier sur une base communiste a touché les fibres d‘une société asiatique profondément rurale et collective, marquée par les pratiques et valeurs quasi communautaire de la rizi-culture irriguée », F. Pelletier, a French historian noticed. It was a tentative to combine the technical and scientific progress with our own communitarian structures and values, “débarrassée(s) des pesanteurs féodales, patriarcales et bureaucratiques” [2] . The psychology and the feelings of rural communes perceiving themselves as “village – State – microcosm” (utilizing the words of the famous Japanese writer Kenzaburo Oe) which opposed to the central government and lived according their own rules [3] , were very close to the idea of self-governing and mainly self-sustaining Commune. + + + First groups of Chinese anarchists were created in the early twentieth century by the Chinese students studying abroad — in France and Japan [4] . The antimonarchical Revolution of 1911 allowed the anarchists to operate openly. Anarchist organizations emerged in Guangzhou (Canton), Shanghai, Beijing, Nanjing and other cities. Leading theorist of Chinese anarchism Liu Shifu, or Shi Fu (died in 1915) in the paper “Ming sheng” (edited by him since 1913 in Guangzhou, and then in Shanghai) argued that unfair social organization is guilty of troubles and poverty in China, and only the World Revolution can destroy all existing authorities and give freedom to people. “Our principles, the paper, wrote, are communism, anti-militarism , syndicalism; we oppose the family, for vegetarianism, international language and universal harmony. We also support all the scientific discoveries that lead to the progress of human livelihoods”. The elimination of power and the establishment of communism, Shi Fu wrote, are leading to equalization of classes and to stop of fighting for the money. The life will become free, and the society of mutual hostility will change to society of mutual love. “If we can destroy the struggle for ownership and thirst for wealth and power, eliminating the institutions of private property and marriage, 80–90 percent of deaths will be removed. Evil and immorality stems from society, not from man”. Shi Fu spoke in favor of a communist version of anarchism: “Anarchism stands for complete freedom of the people, free from any control, with the elimination of all superiors and organs of authorities ... And since the most dangerous authority in the modern world is capitalism, the anarchists are at the same time socialists. Socialism advocates that the means of production and their products belong to the socie…
