---
title: "Black Anarchism — Has its time come?"
author: "Tommy Curry"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tommy-curry-black-anarchism-has-its-time-come"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2005-05-03 from https://web.archive.org/web/20050503220902/http://newshound.de.siu.edu/online/stories/storyReader%243796"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tommy-curry-black-anarchism-has-its-time-come.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tommy-curry-black-anarchism-has-its-time-come.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In recent months, the surge of debate about terrorism and the ethics of this type of warfare against the United States has gained momentum. From the academic to the political sphere, the question about the appropriate use of violence against oppression is being discussed with a level of trepidation. If one uses this forum to ask a question that many waiting for the revolution will inevitably have to encounter, what will come of race relations in America? But you all know me, so I generally wonder “if violence is an appropriate and justifiable response against racism?” Civil war happens in almost every country in the world — why not here? Many multi-culturalists and romantic humanists seem to believe diversity and cultural interaction is the most effective way to combat the racial bigotry and oppression in this society. However, we can see the impetus that large-scale revolts provide in immediately seeking to change social structure. Of course, we will always have the Civil Rights movement as an alleged demonstration of “peace and patience” and the “appeal to the humanity of all,” but it raises two important questions. First, how many of our people have to die in a peaceful demonstration for the natural rights Americans claim are protected by the constitution? In other words, “how long do we have to wait to be human?” Second, do we really think that Europeans changed overnight and gave in to the wishes of oppressed Africans in America because they decided that Africans were just as human as they are? Or was it because they faced a political movement so great in ideology that it threatened regional and eventually national stability? Remember, the Black Panthers and other radical organizations and their members were forcibly eliminated — better yet, murdered — at the hands of Europeans, while the integration of Africans into “American” society began. We are all familiar with the daily murder of Africans by the hands of radical white supremacist groups such as the police, the CIA and the local white communities who ostracize Africans, etc, etc. Like A.J. William-Myers says, “ in America’s democracy, it is always open season on Blacks.” In fact, the mistake that Africans and other non-Europeans make is in assuming that the violence and murder of our people is abnormal — an anomaly in our rich democratic tradition — instead of recognizing violence against minorities and the marginalization of oppressed people as an integral part of the structure. “Tommy, what are you saying?” “Are you actually advocating the murder of racist individuals in an effort to remedy racism,” you ask? Absolutely not. First, murder is such a harsh word — I prefer armed resistance. Secondly, I am talking about social organizations that are loyal to the experience of oppression, those who seek resistance as a possible and strategic solution to the intervention of police, government agents and Europeans loyal to the idea of furthering white supremacy by killing non-Europeans. Africans and non-Europeans must take a stand. The recent onslaught against civil rights by President Bush and the rise in conservatism against the progress of minorities, economically and socially, demand a type of local segregationism that supports the cultural and economic empowerment of oppressed groups. This among other things demand security. Our people die every day in a war that no one is willing to acknowledge is going on. Arab-Americans are being stereotyped and assaulted. Are we really going to keep our faith in a democratic system that targets a perceived threat and justifies their silence by excluding them from democratic procedures and due process? Just remember, it could be us. Then what? It just so happens that Africans have a choice, for once, to be part of the lynch mob. However, it does not mean that another one won’t come for us.
