---
title: "Anarchism: What it Is and What it Is Not"
author: "Victor Yarros"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/victor-yarros-anarchism-what-it-is-and-what-it-is-not"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-06-11 from www.libertarian-labyrinth.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "victor-yarros-anarchism-what-it-is-and-what-it-is-not.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/victor-yarros-anarchism-what-it-is-and-what-it-is-not.epub"
    hosted: false
---

IT was an observation of John Stuart Mill’s that to know a thing it is necessary to realize, not only what it is, but also what it is not. Applying this definition or test to that passage of Mr. Thomas B. Preston’s paper on “Are We Socialists?” (ARENA, December) in which he states and criticises the principles of anarchism, we find ourselves entitled to affirm that Mr. Preston scarcely possesses such familiarity with, and comprehension of, the essential doctrines of anarchism as would justify confident criticism of that school. What is anarchism, and who are the anarchists? Loosely speaking, there are two schools of anarchism, two species of anarchists. There is the school of communist anarchism. This school rigorously adheres to the economic and ‘political teachings of Michael Bakounin. It insists on the “ expropriation of the expropriators”—capitalists and men who live on rent, interest, or profit—and the total abolition of private property in capital, or the means and instruments of production. It favors the use of physical force, and is‘ openly revolutionary. In short, most of Mr. Preston’s statements concerning anarchists certainly may be accepted as~ tolerably exact with reference to this school. The school to which Mr. Preston’s predications do not apply is that of individualist anarchism. Strictly speaking, this school is the only one in the field which possesses the right to the term “ anarchist,” since, as will presently be established, it is the only school which logically and consistently follows out the principle of non-interference with personal liberty. Whether it carries out the principle specified “to an exaggerated absurdity,” is, of course, a matter of opinion; but before delivering any judgment, let us ascertain the precise significance of the principle of “ personal liberty” espoused by the individualist anarchists. Few are aware that the anarchistic principle of “personal liberty” is absolutely coincident with the famous Spencerian “first principle of human happiness,”—the principle of “equal freedom,”—to which precise expression is given in the following formula: Every man is free to do that which he wills, provided he infringes not the equal freedom of any other man. This principle of equal freedom the individualist anarchists accept without reservation or qualification, recognizing no exceptions to scientific ethical laws, any more than to physical laws. By accepting the principle is naturally meant the acceptance of all its corollaries or logical deductions; and these corollaries are: the right to physical integrity, which negatives murder, assault, and minor trespasses; the rights to free motion and locomotion, which imply the freedom to move from place to place without hindrance; the right to the uses of natural media — land, light, air; the right to property, in products as well as in means of production, which negatives any species of robbery and any system of compulsory “nationalism” or communism; the rights of gift and bequests; the rights of free exchange and free contract; the right of free industry; the rights of free belief and worship; and the rights of free speech and publication. These rights are natural social rights, and no society can be stable and harmonious which tolerates their infringement. The test of social progress is observance and respect of these personal rights, and not any form of government. “Crime” can mean nothing else than the violation of one or more of these positive rights; no individual who refrains from aggression or invasion of rights can possibly be criminal. Now, from this point of view let us examine the ethical character of our present political practices. It is admitted without hesitation that no individual can rationally or justly claim the right to trench upon the freedom of any one of his fellows; but it is generally assumed that a government that is, a body representing a majority of the individuals -is entitled to traverse and violate many of the rights …
