---
title: "The Femme’s Guide to Riot Fashion"
author: "CrimethInc."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/elle-armageddon-the-femme-s-guide-to-riot-fashion"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This Season’s Hottest Looks for the Discerning Anarchist Femme"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "elle-armageddon-the-femme-s-guide-to-riot-fashion.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/elle-armageddon-the-femme-s-guide-to-riot-fashion.epub"
    hosted: false
---

With the current surge in political activism over the last year, femmes all over the world have been wondering: How can I participate in the revolution, and look hotter than a Molotov cocktail while doing it? Look no further: we’ve got you covered better than a balaclava! Disclaimer: for the purposes of this article, “rioting” designates any kind of assertive protest activity. As right-wingers try to stigmatize and suppress protest activity of all kinds as “rioting,” we aim to normalize it as something everyone can participate in. There are several important considerations to keep in mind when assembling the perfect outfit for insurrection, including hair, makeup, mask, and which articles of black clothing will be both comfortable and fabulous. Femmes with long hair will want to consider a style that keeps their hair out of their eyes and also does not impede their ability to put on a gas mask. French braids and their “inside-out” counterparts, Dutch braids, work remarkably well for these purposes, are compatible with any hair type, and offer the added benefit of keeping your hair from looking a mess if you wind up spending the night in jail. Femmes with shorter hair may not have the same considerations with regards to keeping their hair out of their eyes; but regardless of hair length, all femmes will probably want to think about also covering their hair as an identity-protecting measure. There are a number of stylish ways to cover up your hair in order to avoid being identified. Hoodies, hijab, and balaclavas are among the most popular, but beanies and wigs can also fulfill this purpose. No matter what head covering you choose, you’ll want to make sure that it is comfortable to wear for long periods of time, provides full coverage, and won’t slip or come off if you need to engage in physical exertion. You’ll also want to make sure that you choose an option that you won’t need to remove in order to put on a gas mask or respirator, if those are things you intend to carry and potentially use. Ideally, it should be compact enough to conceal in the event that you need to change your outfit in order to make a safe and speedy getaway. As far as makeup is concerned, you should avoid putting anything oil-based onto your skin: in the event of chemical weapons deployment, oils cause contaminants to stick to your skin, making them harder to remove. When preparing for a demonstration, it is best to forgo your moisturizer and consider applying an oil-free sunblock instead. A layer of glitter or highlighter dusted over your cheeks can serve double duty, showing off your glorious bone structure while simultaneously providing a helpful way to determine which side of your bandanna was in contact with your face and which side is saturated in tear gas particulate. For a finishing touch, a layer of your favorite waterproof mascara can help make your gorgeous eyes really pop behind your mask. If it will stand up to a breakup or watching Casablanca, it will probably stand up to tear gas and liquid antacid and water. When choosing a mask, you’ll want to select for a few different factors: it should be comfortable to wear for long periods of time, provide full facial coverage, be a tight enough weave to serve as a barrier between chemical weapons and your respiratory system, and also be cute as heck. While a standard black balaclava or bandanna will probably suffice, you may want to consider layering a few different masks on top of each other for effect. For example, a balaclava can provide anonymity while not inhibiting your gas mask or respirator from sealing properly around your nose and mouth, and a black bandanna on top of it can both help you blend in as well as help to better conceal the contours of your face. More layers means more looks, which gives you more options in the streets—so long as you don’t overheat! If you’re feeling fancy, a lightweight glitter bandanna can be worn over the top of everything, sending the message that those who …
