---
title: "The First Prison"
author: "William Gillis"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-gillis-the-first-prison"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "http://humaniterations.net/2018/10/24/the-first-prison"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-gillis-the-first-prison.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-gillis-the-first-prison.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Adult supremacy claims its legitimacy from the notion that age grants critical experience and wisdom. We all know exceptions to this, adults we would classify as unwise, but the ideology persists because it is true that choice in the absence of knowledge is not real choice. Someone has to understand the context of their actions, they have to have an accurate map of the world in order to be able to trace the consequences. This much is true. And so defenders of adult supremacy always want to get into a fine grained fight over how informed a child is or can be. But picture yourself today ripped from your modern adult body back into that of a child – all of your knowledge, experience, and wisdom transmitted intact. Try to imagine how you might try to regain the autonomy and standing of your adult self. You simply wouldn’t be able to. All your knowledge, all your insight and experience would be meaningless. It would make no difference. No matter how advanced your knowledge of mathematics, philosophy, psychology, history, politics, etc, these would merely make you “precocious.” Arrogant, to be more honest. You would never be able to win standing at the table as an equal human being worthy of respect. Your consent would not matter. Nothing you could conceivably do would get you free from your prison, your status as a slave or emotional prop to the adults who own you. No matter how much wiser or more intelligent you might be than the adults holding your chain, it would change nothing besides getting you some distinct treats if you performed well as a pet. Adult supremacy paints itself as a kind of meritocracy, you are only denied political agency because you don’t yet have mental agency. But there is no mechanism – not a single one – under adult supremacy whereby a six year old might prove qualifications to obtain their freedom and equal status. And even if the state were to create some absurdly intense exam that you might pass, there would be countless barriers to you even getting in the door. No parent would ever surrender their property like that. Teenagers are given rights not because they have crested some cognitive hill but because that’s when some of them start to be able to beat up their parents. When they can band together for resistance and physically overwhelm their masters. It is only the physical threat posed that has ever won an age group their autonomy. Intelligence and the infinitely mutable concept of “wisdom” are but the thinnest of drapes over this. Rhetorical excuses with never an ounce of sincerity to their use. Seriously try to imagine, try to strategize how you might secure your autonomy, secure any manner of existence that wasn’t a grueling prison, merely by being an adult mind in a child’s body. Unless you lucked out with the most abnormally enlightened anarchist parents, there’s just no means. At best your parents might allow you to attend university, accumulate books of some interest, get paraded around as a prodigy, but you would not be free. You would not be able to make almost any real choices about where you live, who you associate with, how you work, eat, etc. And those limitations are deeply structural. Not just laws, not just the cultural norms and background ideologies that shape your parents’ sense of the possible, but a vast panoply of expressions of power. Today with the internet you might be able to eek out some manner of a double life. But the limits of that mask are nevertheless intense. Imagine being a six year old and realizing you face a twelve year jail sentence, a horizon twice your lifespan ahead. A level of extreme insertion and control by a totalitarian arrangement that doesn’t just feel entitled to condition you physically but mentally, emotionally – an apparatus of domination that sees its very success as your total consumption by it. No prison in the world is as attentive and absolute as “parents.” What we fear when we fear prison is a partial return to the social status of “child” –…
