---
title: "25th Anniversary of Roe v. Wade"
author: "Laura W."
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/laura-w-25th-anniversary-of-roe-v-wade"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Nov/Dec 1997 issue of L&amp;R. Retrieved on 2016-06-13 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "laura-w-25th-anniversary-of-roe-v-wade.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/laura-w-25th-anniversary-of-roe-v-wade.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Beyond Choice        Action Ideas January 22, 1998 marks the 25 th anniversary of legal abortion in the US. A quarter century after women won this basic right on paper, the ability to control our reproductive lives is not a reality for most women. Cutbacks on welfare, lack of child care, dead-end jobs, lack of healthy birth control alternatives, men that won’t use condoms, lack of health insurance, lack of access health services including abortion and prenatal care, harassment and violence at our clinics, in our homes and in the streets are just a few of the obstacles to this critical aspect of women’s freedom. In anticipation of January’s anniversary I look forward to an ongoing dialogue about how to take back this battle, reframe it in terms of women’s lives and health—and win. The media will certainly play this silver anniversary as a significant one. The fact that the majority of folks in the US still support legal abortion has been eclipsed in part by the much publicized conversion of Norma McCorvey. (Jane Roe, of Roe v. Wade, became a born again Christian and Operation Rescue member last year and recanted her pro-choice views as well as her lesbianism.) We can expect two things from the mainstream media on the anniversary of Roe. First, they will most likely take their cue from Operation Rescue and Christian Coalition press releases and use McCorvey’s “switch” as an invitation to question the morality of abortion. And they will legitimize the voices of anti-abortion leadership who have spearheaded violence, harassment and assault of women and doctors around the country as respectable, family-oriented, ‘non-violent’ fetus lovers. The tepid “pro-choice” response, which the mainstream feminist leadership will broadcast at press conferences, will most likely focus on the need for more laws on the single issue of abortion. Will they defend abortion as an inalienable right for women and proclaim that women should be able to have an abortion without apology or hassle? Probably not. Mainstream pro-choice voices can sound foggily “anti-abortion” as they talk about abortion as the lesser of two evils—“a sad necessity.” Abortion can be emotionally hard for some women who are already mothers or who want to be. Having an abortion can also be an incredible relief and an exercise of personal power over one’s life and one’s future. Long-time clinic workers have told me that they have observed a significant shift in women’s reactions to abortion over the past 25 years a shift they believe was induced by anti-abortion harassment and the mass cultural backlash on women’s rights. These reactions have moved from profound expressions of relief at receiving good health care—instead of a potentially deadly illegal abortion—to varying levels of guilt and anxiety. This notable anniversary is ripe to re-ignite a movement for women’s freedom. Many activists I know on the abortion rights and other fronts have resigned themselves to the paltry and apathetic response to their organizing efforts. While we can not simply conjure the spirit of mass resistance, we can start dialogues, create propaganda and actions that better involve communities and speak to peoples’ experiences. As a movement that has successfully mobilized against anti-abortion assaults at our clinics, I think we are fairly good at articulating what we are fighting against. Motivating people to stay mobilized and engaged for the long haul involves much more. We must include a clear vision of what we are fighting for. We are fighting for women’s freedom. “Choice” just doesn’t cut it. Roe was never enough. Roe v. Wade itself was a compromise, an effort to co-opt the powerful women’s movement that was demanding an end to all laws that regulate abortion. Roe made abortion a matter of privacy rather than an essential human right. It also left the decision not entirely up to a woman, but as a matter decided “between a woman and her doctor.” So much for “a woman’s choice.” A movement hi…
