---
title: "Dimensions of Radical Political Emancipation"
author: "Yavor Tarinski"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-dimensions-of-radical-political-emancipation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 28th April 2023 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yavor-tarinski-dimensions-of-radical-political-emancipation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-dimensions-of-radical-political-emancipation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Transgression of Bureaucratic Roles and Identities        Creation of Public Space        Creation of Public Time        Conclusion If we begin with the state, we end with the state. Let us begin instead with the popular reunions[…], the various associations and committees[…]. -Kristin Ross [1] Political emancipation, in the most authentic and democratic sense of the term, means emancipation from the specialization of politics. In other words, it is a project of direct democracy where society, not some extra-social source, self-institutes its form and self-limits its activity. The seeds of such political emancipation can be traced to many historic moments. Among them are the Paris Commune, May ’68, but also the more recent one Zone à defender (zad). In all these cases we can see elements of direct democracy where politics is practiced “from below”. We can also add, to a certain extent, the Yellow Vest movement with its recent adoption of democratic confederalist organizational structure [2] , as well as its demands that increasingly ask for more citizen participation [3] . According to this understanding of political emancipation there can’t be a single socio-economic class or vanguard to initiate revolutionary change. For example, when author Kristin Ross examines the creation of genuine public space and time during the Paris Commune, she refutes the role of industrial proletariat as the sole actor of social change [4] . There was also, she notes, a significant role played by semiskilled peasants, who had migrated from the provinces to work in the city, as well as by traditional artisans, that were located at the bottom of the artistic hierarchy of the time. Prosper-Oliver Lissagaray reminds us that women were also present in the Paris Commune in a very dynamic way: the women were the first to act. Those of 18 th March, hardened by the siege — they had had a double ration of misery — did not wait for the men [5] . What was revolutionary during the Paris Commune was that each of these groups transgressed their bureaucratic roles and acted instead as citizens – as political beings that are capable of democratically determining their future. Ross observed similar traits in May ’68, where she underlines the importance of other groups besides the students and the workers, like the peasants. In both these cases target of the popular rebellions was not only industrial capitalism, but the symbols of bureaucratization and policing of everyday life that stagnated spatiality and temporality. What was revolutionary about them was that people chose to transgress their heteronomously determined roles and acted instead as citizens, recreating a truly public space and time. Below I will examine three dimensions of political emancipation in this line of thought: transgressions of bureaucratic roles and identities; creation of public space; liberation of time. One important characteristic of popular uprisings is the effort of those “below” to transgress their bureaucratically determined roles, imposed on them by state, religion, capital etc. For example, French philosopher Maurice Blanchot writes that the specific force of May ’68 derived from the fact that in this so-called student action, students never acted as students, but as the revealers of a total crisis, as bearers of a power of rupture putting into question the regime, the State, the society [6] . This refusal reveals a general crisis of political representation and hierarchy, which cannot make people stick to their imposed narrow roles. These non-students, i.e. people who transgress their role, became bearers of rupture with the dominant regime, putting into question the state and the current capitalist structure of society. Similar traits can be observed in the Paris Commune as well. The communards attacked not only the monarchy, but all forms of hierarchy within the French society. For a clear sign for this Ross points at their choice to attack the Vendome Column (with Napo…
