---
title: "Anarchy Against the Discipline"
author: "Jeff Ferrell"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-ferrell-anarchy-against-the-discipline"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Culture, 3(4) (1995) 86–91. Retrieved on December 21, 2019 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jeff-ferrell-anarchy-against-the-discipline.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-ferrell-anarchy-against-the-discipline.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Author: DiCristina, B. Title: Method in criminology: A philosophical primer . Publisher: New York: Harrow and Heston. Year: 1995 Method in Criminology: A Philosophical Primer is a deceptively innocuous title for a wonderfully outrageous enterprise: a thoroughgoing epistemic attack which Bruce DiCristina launches on both the day-to-day operations of criminology and the philosophical foundations on which these operations rest. In this brief but engaging book, DiCristina carefully and ruthlessly (Marx, 1972) dismantles the basic assumptions which undergird scientific criminology. In so doing, he exposes not only their internal illogic, but their external utility for the bureaucratic control of both crime and criminology, and for the structural maintenance of inequitable social relations. In place of the dangerous fraud which is scientific criminology, then, DiCristina proposes an anarchic criminology — a criminology which embraces alternative methods and epistemologies, encourages imaginative solutions to social and criminal problems, and in the process continually undermines encrusted hierarchies of certainty, truth, and power. DiCristina begins his decomposition of contemporary criminology by posing a seemingly safe, simple question: “Should any research method be granted a privileged status in criminology?” (p. vii). DiCristina’s pursuit of this question, though, quickly becomes the thread which, once pulled, unravels the entire enterprise of contemporary scientific criminology. The unravelling begins with a deconstruction of causality and causal certainty as the goals of criminology. Pitting the radical uncertainty of David Hume against the proto-scientific methods of John Stuart Mill, DiCristina demonstrates that causal assertions are in fact “little more than constructs of the imagination” (p. 15), with no firm footing in external validation. Having demonstrated the futility of causal analysis for criminology, DiCristina generously offers those who would pursue a scientific criminology a variety of less stringent options — probability, prediction, falsification — and then proceeds to undermine these possibilities as well. Drawing heavily on Feyerabend’s (1975) brilliant attack on science and scientific method, and on philosophers of science like Kuhn (1970), Lakatos (1968), and Rorty (1989), DiCristina dismisses probability and prediction due to their reliance on wholly unreliable methods of induction and inductive reasoning. He likewise exposes the falsity of a falsification method which fails to understand that theories and the facts by which they are allegedly falsified in reality interpenetrate and intermingle. Finally, he considers the least stringent of options — that certain methods are, if not scientifically sound, at least the most plausible means for pursuing criminological goals. Again, though, he finds that fundamental epistemic uncertainty destroys any hierarchy of plausibility. Significantly, DiCristina demonstrates that this consideration of criminology’s underlying principles constitutes much more than an exercise in abstract philosophy. First, he shows that mainstream criminology is carefully guarded by various gatekeepers of scientific authority and methodological purity: journal and book editors and reviewers, curriculum designers, granting agencies, and others. In demanding that criminological work meet the standards of science, and excluding that work which does not, these authorities shape the discipline around narrow (and, as DiCristina argues, unfounded) definitions of scholarship (see Vaughn, Sjoberg and Reynolds, 1993; Feagin, Orum and Sjoberg, 1991; Williams, 1984). Beyond this, the framing of criminology as objective science contributes to the functional rationality of the modern criminal justice system, and is in turn “especially conducive to the maintenance of inequitable distributions of power” (p. 67). As DiCristina persuasively argues, the authority of allegedly objective knowledge, the shee…
