---
title: "Déjà vu and the Horizontal Reinstitution of Future"
author: "Yavor Tarinski"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-deja-vu-and-the-horizontal-reinstitution-of-future"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://autonomies.org/2026/04/deja-vu-and-the-horizontal-reinstitution-of-future/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "yavor-tarinski-deja-vu-and-the-horizontal-reinstitution-of-future.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/yavor-tarinski-deja-vu-and-the-horizontal-reinstitution-of-future.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We become epigones or spectators, but epigones or spectators of our very own potential-to-be. ~Paolo Virno [1] Within bureaucratic settings time seems to simultaneously rush and stay frozen – an endless cycle of past-presentism that shrinks leisure and creativity, producing a feeling of déjà vu and futurelessness. It is a condition that withers imagination and makes life miserable. It conditions us to simply observe our future, rather than allow us to inhabit and actively shape it. To alter this we first must obtain an understanding of why we tend to experience our present as stagnant and the structural architecture that corrodes our ability to imagine beyond the horizon of what currently exists. Our daily experiences are being rushed by the capitalist clock. We feel as if there is never enough time for all the things we have to do or desire to experience. And this is true, as our daily temporalities are being densely fragmented in a highly precarious setting, where we have to rush from one task to another, in increasingly fragmented routines, if we don’t want to find ourselves at the bottom layers of society, among the most disempowered. On the central political stage, characterized by oligarchic elements such as professional politicians, elections, and supposed representation, there too seems to be a lot going on in the short-term. On daily bases we are bombarded, both on social media and on mainstream media, by the spectacle of rival partisan factions clashing with each other in their never-ending pursuit for political authority. On the geopolitical field too, competing blocks of Capital clash with each other. But there is simultaneously another feeling, that of time saturation, when looking at the world on a long-term temporal scale. We are not speaking here of history repeating itself , as argued by Marx when quoting Hegel. [2] Instead, what we have is a general feeling of déjà vu . People grow older, things get worn out, the planet keeps spinning, politicians quarrel, but on the social level things remain generally the same. Yes, governments still change, new reforms are being passed and alliances are forged or disbanded etc., but the general political architecture of our societies remains unchanged. This is the promise of stability and normality offered by the genuinely bureaucratic Capital-Nation-State complex—an oligarchic order, whose institutions remain unapt for alteration and only harden their grip on society. The only choice people have beyond begging the ruling class for minor reforms is to revolt and initiate their own alternative institutions from below. But this is by no means an easy task as the status quo is aware of this potentiality and develops an ever increasing array of obstacles to prevent people from even thinking of revolution. Even before Fukuyama’s proclamation of the end of history we had two opposing sides, each claiming to be the alternative to the other. But, in reality, they were the two faces of the same coin. Cornelius Castoriadis described them as Fragmented (i.e. Western) versus Totalitarian (i.e. Soviet) bureaucratic capitalism, [3] thus underlying their core similarity. The same holds, to an even greater degree, for the emerging multipolar geopolitical reality of today or for the rival partisan factions that quarrel in parliaments worldwide, as they all are inclined to operate strictly within the frameworks of statecraft and capitalism. This “similarity” is not a product of mere “chance” or a political failure, but the logical outcome of the way our temporal imagination is systemized. When we think of the future, we lean on our conception of the past, and our thinking takes place at the present. In every moment we reflect on time, we find ourselves both immersed in and detached from a temporal flow that seems to supersede us in every way. Immersed, since our envisioning of the future is never in nihilo or cum nihilo, but rather conditioned by our present situation, which, in turn, is fr…
