---
title: "Consensus decision making sucks"
author: "Kim Foale"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kim-foale-consensus-decision-making-sucks"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Oscar Wilde once wrote that “the problem with socialism is that it takes up too many evenings”. Possibly there is no greater culprit for these lost evenings than the scourge of consensus decision making, Kim vents."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kim-foale-consensus-decision-making-sucks.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kim-foale-consensus-decision-making-sucks.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Reason 1: the prerequisites for it are rarely met        Reason 2: middle management abhors a vaccuum        Reason 3: it becomes nearly impossible to contribute specific or specialist labour        Reason 4: feminised labour is taken for granted        Final thoughts There, I said it. I’ve spent a lifetime in groups using consensus decision making, been an advocate for it myself, been to trainings for it and taught other people. It feels extremely vulnerable and cancellable to say: I think it maybe just sucks . Why? In this piece I cover four intersecting reasons. Firstly, the prerequisites for consensus are usually seen as a given when this couldn’t be further from the truth in most places it’s used. Secondly, the insistance we are all equal just means real life class dynamics seep through. Thirdly, this middle management mush tends to create a culture of mediocrity and a fear of specialised labour that weirdly ends up being anti-worker. Finally, feminised labour is somehow even more taken for granted than in wider society and women and femmes end up doing all the work while men have somewhere to go argue with each other. Let’s get into these in detail. Consensus is great when it’s there and it’s a powerful thing to aim for. “ Consensus decision making” , as a way to run meetings, is a completely different beast. The idea of consensus decision making is basically that we can get some people who don’t know each other very well, and who may disagree, through a meeting process no-one is really trained in, enjoys or understands, probably in a cold community centre on a weekday evening, come to an agreement on something contentious under time pressure while someone takes minutes. You can download this in flowchart or illustration form, such as the beatiful one below. Somehow, this is so sensible an idea we need to use it as the backbone to an entire movement. Oh how I wish it were so. As a default cultural expectation imo it sucks . There’s loads of places where we do use consensus without really thinking about it: running a household, in intimate partner relationships, in small groups around personal healthcare, going to protests or on demos with a group of friends, and for that matter just going to the pub. Essentially, any situation in which people have roughly equal investment, already know and trust each other, and are doing something difficult, intimate, or life sustaining with each other. In each of these cases there’s a real need for it, and I wouldn’t feel comfortable without it either. Outside of that though I’m now increasingly convinced that consensus, as it is practiced in the communities I’ve used it in, is just getting in the way. I am a big Dean Spade fan and think he is one of the best writers on mutual aid, but this slide from a video series I watched recently inadvertently sums up why I think it sucks: it’s frequently used in situations where none of the things on the list are true . And we have to stop pretending they are! In my experience of activist groups, there is no clear common purpose, and time is not made to decide common purpose. They generally consist of a few existing relationships and friendship groups mixed in with a few relative strangers and friends of friends “vouched” for, and so can’t be described as high trust environments, even while people in the group love to insist they are. Usually no-one has had any formal or informal training in consensus process, and space for this training is not made. Proposals are rarely written down formally, minutes and action points are seen as an afterthought, and there is no culture of meeting facilitation. There is never a project plan. People have vastly different financial and structural investments and accountabilities. The beautiful flowchart bears no resemblance to what actually happens. Everyone’s supposedly read The Tyranny of Structurelessness , but seemingly has learned nothing from it. Rather than talking about these things and trying to est…
