---
title: "The English Master"
author: "Malcolm Archibald, Alexander Atabekian"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-atabekian-the-english-master"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published originally in Pochin, No. 6, June 1920, p. 1. Translation and notes by Malcolm Archibald. Retrieved on 15th January 2024 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexander-atabekian-the-english-master.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-atabekian-the-english-master.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In the spring of 1920 a delegation sponsored by the British Trades Union Congress visited Russia on a fact-finding mission. This was an important event for the Bolshevik regime, which had only a few months earlier been virtually at war with Great Britain. The delegates were treated as celebrities, but at the same time were closely chaperoned. But the Bolsheviks were not entirely in control of the situation because left-wing opposition groups still maintained a precarious existence. Matters got out of hand when delegates insisted on attending a special meeting convened by the Menshevik-controlled printers’ union in Moscow. Detailed reports about the meeting are found in the memoirs of the Menshevik Fedor Dan and the Socialist-Revolutionary Victor Chernov, both of whom spoke at the event. The meeting was also described by Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman, although neither was actually present. But there is an anarchist account of the meeting in the journal Pochin [The Beginning], a monthly published in Moscow. The article is unsigned but was almost certainly written by the editor Aleksandr Atabekian, an exponent of anarcho-cooperativism. Atabekian chose as an allegory for the British visit the well known poem “The Forgotten Village” by Nikolai Nekrasov, published in 1855. The poem tells of the plight of villagers who are being victimized in various ways, and pin their hopes on the intervention of their absentee landlord (“the Master”). But help never comes; instead the landlord dies and is replaced by his equally indifferent son. Clearly Atabekian is making an analogy between Russia’s ineffectual opposition parties and the naïve villagers. The “English Master” in fact has a message for the oppositionists, but it is one they are not prepared to hear. “Now the Master will come, The Master will make things right.” — Nekrasov Representatives of English labour organizations have come to Russia with a very well-defined goal – to study the current situation in Russia. But we, the Russians, instead of competently assisting them in this endeavour, have made them a judge over our affairs, into a Master coming to straighten out things for us. Our ruling circles right off the bat proposed to our guests to pass judgement on the “predatory imperialism” of the government of their own country and the states allied with it, and they passed a corresponding solemn resolution. The arrival of the English guests delighted the unified opposition parties and allowed them to put our internal regime on trial. That was in fact the character of the public meeting convened by the Moscow printshop workers, which took place on May 23 in the hall of the Conservatory. Here representatives of the political parties began zealously and with commendable candour to excoriate each other for the gravest villainies. The representative of the Red Communists delivered a telling blow to the Mensheviks when he recalled that in 1918 in Petrograd they had joined an “association for the defense of freedom of the press,” which included newspaper publishers who were treacherous “social-compromisers.” But this same Communist was completely unable to prove that his party, once in power, had not offered deals to foreign capitalists in the form of concessions, had not used the services of Russian entrepreneurs as suppliers to the state, and had not established friendly relations with a crowned Asiatic monarch. The Mensheviks, on the other hand, laid bare all the governmental persecution and violence. One thing only they forgot to mention: by what means did they themselves propose to rule if they were able to take power and hold on to it? Would they forgo persecutions, prohibitions, and prisons? Or executions and the armed suppression of mutinies? Can state power exist in any other way? Is state power without violence conceivable? Chernov himself – the “star” of the meeting – set forth a comparison between our current rulers and the prelates of the first centuries of Christianity,…
