---
title: "Noirceur Parfaite #2"
author: "Noirceur Parfaite"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anti-fascist-movement-2017-noirceur-parfaite-2"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Anti-Fascist Movement in 2017"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anti-fascist-movement-2017-noirceur-parfaite-2.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anti-fascist-movement-2017-noirceur-parfaite-2.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Preamble        1) Anti-fascism, like any social movement, is a constant.        2) Anti-fascism, like any social movement, is a space.        3) In 2017, anti-fascism is experiencing greater visibility and a higher level of participation than normal.        4) The baseline objective of the anti-fascist movement, while obviously limited from a critical anarchist perspective, is entirely consistent with anarchist aims.        5) Engagement with the anti-fascist movement can serve to satisfy both the emotional and practical needs of anarchists.        6) Petitioning the government is useless; direct action gets the goods.        7) Under Canadian law, the state guarantees the right of citizens to peaceful assembly and peaceful expression of political opinion.        8) Anarchists should not feel okay about marching behind Maoist banners.        9) Anarchists should deviate from easy narratives that frequently fail to compete with the narratives propagated by fascists.        10) The only way to stop random and autonomously planned violence is better policing.        11) Theories of fascism are politically and emotionally motivated.        12) Participation and engagement will produce better knowledge of the anti-fascist movement than intellectual approaches ever will.        Concluding Thoughts I expected to have published the second Noirceur Parfaite long before now, but for at least two reasons, it didn’t happen. The first reason is that I felt like kind of a dick after the first one. I more or less stand by my comments, but the reaction elicited from at least one person involved in the @news project wasn’t what I was expecting, and I felt bad about it. One of the problems with anarchist discourse right now is that we tend towards being assholes with one another—or at least, it often feels that way. I don’t like this or want this. If anything, I’d say that I would prefer to be a force in the world that works counter to this tendency, and moves us all along to All Hanging Out and Smoking Weed (the second part being a stand-in for whatever fun activity you like). This is not a realistic project, but that’s not the point of it. The second reason is that I was busy. Thankfully, I had the advantage of a vacation recently, which I spent in southern Ontario—but I expect I will remain busy with other projects in the next days. Hopefully there will be time to keep working on this column, and to make it more regular, but I’m not entirely sure how realistic a goal that is. In the time since the last column, a friend asked me to “facilitate” a discussion about anti-fascism—or more properly, a discussion about going “Beyond Anti-Fascism”, as it would end up titled. (How many workshops, discussions, etc. have I done in which someone else puts the word “beyond” in the title?) I put the word “facilitate” in air quotes because it was unclear to me what this would mean. What ended up happening is that I introduced the discussion, and really made very little effort to facilitate anything; I did not take stack, I did not try to draw out themes, nothing of the sort. Instead, I made two requests of those listening: let’s avoid any efforts to define fascism, and let’s avoid talking about specific events, primarily demos. Then I expressed my own ideas for a little over five minutes, and from there, other people started to talk too. The conversation was all over the place, but I actually liked it in this context. People talked about what they wanted to talk about, and I wanted to know what others’ priorities were. Really, we were having a conversation about the context , and the referent “anti-fascism” was just a gateway to that. There was some discussion of the established practice of counterprotesting La Meute whenever those fucks decide to go to the Lacolle border crossing (as happened most recently on September 30), but there was also wild and enthusiastic talk of squats in the countryside and the deep woods where the spook of citizenship w…
