---
title: "From Living Wage to Working Class Counter-power"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-from-living-wage-to-working-class-counter-power"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Theory, Strategy And Struggle"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-from-living-wage-to-working-class-counter-power.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-from-living-wage-to-working-class-counter-power.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ABSTRACT        INTRODUCTION        THE WAGE SYSTEM IN CONTEXT        MINIMUM WAGE VERSUS A LIVING WAGE        TOP-DOWN WAGE SETTING        LIVING WAGES, FROM BELOW        JUSTICE, UNITY, EQUALITY        ‘PRIVILEGE’ OR OPPRESSION?        GLOBALISING FROM BELOW        ALLIANCES BEYOND THE WORKPLACE        A LIVING WAGE IS NOT ENOUGH        BUILDING “COUNTER-POWER”        SELF-ACTIVITY AND AUTONOMY        RIGHTS RELY ON POWER        FROM WAGE STRUGGLES TO SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION        THERE ARE NO SHORT CUTS        REFERENCES Based on a talk given at a Living Wage Conference in Kenya, this article argues that, while statutory minimum wages and other improvements are welcome gains, they are inadequate in an exploiting system based on the rule of the few. It is necessary to pose the more ambitious demand for a ‘living wage’ set by the working class. This should be developed and enforced as part of a process of building powerful, autonomous, self-managed, politically conscientised and universalist class-struggle movements opposing all forms of oppression. Rejecting ‘privilege’ theories, this article argues that all sectors of the broad working class benefit from demands and campaigns that secure equal rights, equal treatment and equal wages, against divide-and-rule systems, and in which strikers build alliances with communities and users. A ‘living wage’ movement of this type should be located in a larger project of building a popular counter-power that can resist, and then topple, ruling class power. The fight for a ‘living wage’ is part of the struggle, but is not an end in itself; it should link to broader working-class struggles to build a counter-power that overthrows the existing power structure. [1] The wage system is at the heart of the subjugation of the broad working class, that is, workers, their families and the unemployed. not owning any independent means of existence, for example, land or productive machinery or governing power, and access to real decision-making, the working class is compelled to work for wages, in order to survive. Even those who do not have waged employment are reliant, through family members, on the wages by those who are employed; the unemployed are, above al , unemployed workers. in this sense, the working class are ‘wage slaves’: unlike slaves bought permanently by masters, the wage slaves must seek out masters and sel themselves, by the hour (Bakunin, [1871] 1993). Since wages are always below the level of workers’ output, workers are exploited through the wage system: they are paid less than the value of what they produce, the surplus value accruing to employers (kropotkin, [1887] 1970: 71). These employers are the state, including the state corporations and army, and private employers, especially corporations, but also include small employers. The big employers constitute a ruling class, owners of the state and of capital, including of state capital and the political and military elite. That is, exploitation is not the sole preserve of private capitalists, but is also undertaken by the upper levels of the state apparatus, the ‘bureaucratic aristocracy’ (Bakunin, [1873] 1971: 343), including military heads, parliamentarians, and so forth. Exploitation is closely linked to a larger system of domination economically, culturally, socially, political y by the ruling class, that is, those who control the means of administration, coercion and production over the popular classes as a whole. Besides the working class (broadly understood), the popular classes include the peasantry (the smal family farmers, exploited through rent, taxes and monopolies) (for more on the peasantry, see Kropotkin, [1887] 1970: 55). It is through two pyramid shaped structures that the ruling class – a small minority – has centralised power and wealth in its hands, these being states (centred on state managers: political and military elites) and corporations (centred on private capitalists), which work together. The s…
