---
title: "Anarchism, Again"
author: "Josep Rafanell i Orra"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/josep-rafanell-i-orra-anarchism-again"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "First published in À bas bruit, December 1, 2025. | Translated from the French by Ill Will: June 16th, 2026. Retrieved on June 18, 2026 from illwill.com/anarchism-again"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "josep-rafanell-i-orra-anarchism-again.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/josep-rafanell-i-orra-anarchism-again.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In December of 2025, a new journal appeared in France entitled À bas bruits [ Under the Radar ]. In the opening article of its first issue, Josep Rafanell i Orra argues that anarchism has always functioned as an escape route for communities fleeing the iron cage of society. Among the many competing conceptions of what an anarchist politics today could or should look like, Rafanell’s stance is anti-social, yet non-nihilist. On the one hand, he rejects as internalized domination any affirmation of the social identities thrust upon us by commodity society and the state. This rejection demands that we abandon any quest for hegemony within the so-called public sphere, which always devolves into a sad clamoring over credit within today’s “reputation economy.” It also entails a refusal of any model of organizing premised on the noisy self-promotion of entrepreneurs masquerading as political avant-guards. The light of the Spectacle only blinds, and never clarifies. This negativist posture is, however, counterbalanced by the author’s insistent affirmation of the experience of community, which he sees as overlapping worlds in a process of becoming. Offering the example of a longstanding experimental mutual aid project in a proletarian neighborhood of Paris, Rafanell envisions self-organization as the elaboration of insurgent environments and territories operating in the opaque zones of everyday life, whose mode of existence involves a continuous detachment from the policed premises of metropolitan society. Even in a major French city, he argues, anarchic forms are not primarily social in nature, but cosmological: what is in question is a tissue of attachments, practices of sharing and reciprocal encounter that give a common form to their environment, while remaining nonidentical with themselves. If there are ungovernable futures that lie ahead for us, insurrections still to come, they emerge from this “patchwork” of conflictual practices and bonds that inhabited cities foster. Rather than struggling for control over a hostile public sphere, which only destroys the spaces of community that matter the most, Rafanell calls us to produce an “archive of communal forms,” a cartography of divergent, migratory potentials within the uncertain contours of everyday life. It is here that the ethical and the practical reunite, allowing mutual aid to engender combative conspiracies. Let’s start at the beginning — which is to say, from the middle. Take, for example, a neighborhood marked by exile, migration, and transience: early in the morning at the Jardin d’Éole in Paris’s 18 th arrondissement, a plot of land fenced off by local authorities to prevent exhausted migrants — condemned to wandering the streets — from settling there, a space bordered by an urban farm with a handful of sheep to add an eco-friendly touch to this neighborhood where exiles loiter, but also crackheads wandering like zombies, both groups harassed by police evictions. There’s also an annex to the Théâtre de la Villette, barricaded behind wire-mesh walls plastered with portraits purporting to represent “the neighborhood’s diversity,” a clumsy attempt to convey the cultural facility’s integration into this working-class area. It’s here, inside yet another fence, that migrants gather for breakfast. There stands a heavy Algeco prefab unit, its ugliness concealed as best as possible by a coat of paint. Inside, shelves are stocked with foodstuffs, hygiene products, along with a sink and a worktop with an electric hotplate. And then there’s Latifa, in her fifties, in front of a large cooking pot, overseeing the meal preparation, surrounded by others preparing the breakfasts that will be served this morning. Outside, in the bitter February cold, under an insistent drizzle of rain, a group of Afghans are busy setting up tents under which the food distribution will take place. Young men and women from the neighborhood, members of various collectives, some traveling from a fair distance …
