---
title: "Against the Terror of Anti-Terror"
author: "Malaginoo"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/malaginoo-against-the-terror-of-anti-terror"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-06-01 from bandilangitim.noblogs.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "malaginoo-against-the-terror-of-anti-terror.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/malaginoo-against-the-terror-of-anti-terror.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A History of Insurgency        Reading Between the Lines        Overbroad and Overpowered        The Terror in Anti-Terror The Philippine government is another step closer to revealing its true self: an undemocratic, oppressive entity ready to protect and serve the interests of the powerful, wealthy, and privileged few. Before there was talk of lockdowns and quarantines during the COVID-19 pandemic, there was the issue of updating the Human Security Act, a law defining the parameters of terrorism. After many days and weeks of politicking, grandstanding, and red-tagging, Congress unveiled the 2020 Anti-Terror Bill. [1] In it, the government aims to strip whatever semblance of constitutional liberties and rights are left after the Duterte administration’s stints into extrajudicial killings and human rights abuses, that have claimed upwards of 5,000 lives and left indelible marks on the lives of countless Filipino families. [2] On the 28 th of February 2020, the Senate passed their version of the Anti-Terror bill, with 19 senators voting yes, and only 2 voting no. [3] Debate still rages in the House of Representatives on its merits and its dangers, [4] however, as of the 29 th of May, two congressional committees approved the Anti-Terror Bill. [5] As the people of the archipelago face the greatest health crisis of this century without mass testing, public safety, and financial stability, Congress is trying to take advantage of us while we are down and already suffering from pandemic and the excesses of government. Different insurgent groups exist within our country, whose goals aim to threaten and change the status quo — to overthrow the people who benefit from it: the current ruling class. The most prominent of these groups are the Bangsamoro separatists (such as the MNLF and MILF), the Islamic fundamentalists (such as the BIFF, the Abu Sayyaf, and the Maute Group) [6] and the Marxist-Leninist parties engaged in armed struggle (the CPP-NPA-NDF and remnants of MLPP-RHB). [7] These sets of militant organizations with their own allegiances and motivations have been operating for decades across the archipelago, challenging government power in rural and urban areas around the country. It is in this landscape of insurgency that in 1996, then-Senator Juan Ponce Enrile introduced a bill that would create a legal definition for terrorism, and outline what the police and military can or cannot do to catch and prosecute convicted “terrorists.” [8] A “watered-down” and “toothless” version of this bill became the Human Security Act, signed into law by then-President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo in 2007. [9] However, the rhetoric since then has evolved as Rodrigo Duterte became the President of the Philippines. Duterte has condoned and even called for the extrajudicial execution of alleged drug users and pushers as part of his campaign against illegal narcotics. [10] He also told soldiers to shoot female rebel combatants in the genitalia, a clear violation of the Geneva Convention. [11] Meanwhile, police and military forces regularly illegally detain dissidents, regardless of their affiliation or intention. [12] There are even cases where farmers, workers, and activists are murdered as part of “anti-subversion activities.” [13] Worse still, indigenous Lumad ancestral land across the country are being occupied illegally, while atrocities against their communities continue to be perpetrated. [14] Left and right, in the name of public safety and order, the current administration has committed grave violations of human rights. Civil and military officers even called for the restoration and enhancement of laws and measures to make their jobs easier, presumably so that they could claim more victims and plunder more territory. This included the push by Secretary Año to bring back the Anti-Subversion Law that specifically targeted communists and those with communist sympathies. [15] In this context, one cannot help but be skeptical about the govern…
