---
title: "East Timor: Comments On the Occasion of the Forthcoming APEC Summit"
author: "Noam Chomsky"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/noam-chomsky-east-timor-comments-on-the-occasion-of-the-forthcoming-apec-summit"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in ZNet. Retrieved on 19th June 2021 from chomsky.info"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "noam-chomsky-east-timor-comments-on-the-occasion-of-the-forthcoming-apec-summit.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/noam-chomsky-east-timor-comments-on-the-occasion-of-the-forthcoming-apec-summit.epub"
    hosted: false
---

There are many topics of major long-term significance that should be addressed at the APEC conference, but one is of consuming importance and overwhelming urgency. We all know exactly what it is, and why it must be placed at the forefront of concern — and more important, instant action. This conference provides an opportunity — there may not be many more — to terminate the tragedy that is once again reaching shocking proportions in East Timor. The Indonesian military forces who invaded East Timor 24 years ago, and have been slaughtering and terrorizing its inhabitants ever since, are right now, as I write, in the process of sadistically destroying what remains: the population, the cities and villages. What they are planning, we cannot be sure: a Carthaginian solution is not out of the question. The tragedy of East Timor has been one of the most awesome of this terrible century. It is also of particular moral significance for us, for the simplest and most obvious of reasons. Western complicity has been direct and decisive. The expected corollary also holds: unlike the crimes of official enemies, these can be ended by means that have always been readily available, and still are. The current wave of terror and destruction began early this year, under the pretense that the atrocities were the work of “uncontrolled militias.” It was quickly revealed that these were paramilitary forces armed, organized, and directed by the Indonesian army, who also participated directly in their “criminal activities,” as these have just been described by Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas, still maintaining the shameful pretense that the “military institution” that is directing the crimes is seeking to stop them. The Indonesian military forces are commonly described as “rogue elements.” That is hardly accurate. Most prominent among them are Kopassus units sent to East Timor to carry out the actions for which they are famed, and dreaded. They have “the job of managing the militias, many observers believe,” veteran Asia correspondent David Jenkins reported as the terror was mounting. Kopassus is the “crack special forces unit” modeled on the U.S. Green Berets that had “been training regularly with US and Australian forces until their behaviour became too much of an embarrassment for their foreign friends.” These forces are “legendary for their cruelty,” observes Benedict Anderson, one of the leading Indonesia scholars. In East Timor, Anderson continues, “Kopassus became the pioneer and exemplar for every kind of atrocity,” including systematic rapes, tortures and executions, and organization of hooded gangsters. Jenkins wrote that Kopassus officers, trained in the United States, adopted the tactics of the US Phoenix program in South Vietnam, which killed tens of thousands of peasants and much of the indigenous South Vietnamese leadership, as well as “the tactics employed by the Contras” in Nicaragua, following lessons taught by their CIA mentors that it should be unnecessary to review. The state terrorists were “not simply going after the most radical pro-independence people but going after the moderates, the people who have influence in their community.” “It’s Phoenix,” a well-placed source in Jakarta reported: the aim is “to terrorise everyone” — the NGOs, the Red Cross, the UN, the journalists. All of this was well before the referendum and the atrocities conducted in its immediate aftermath. As to these, there is good reason to heed the judgment of a high-ranking Western official in Dili. “Make no mistake,” he reported: “this is being directed from Jakarta. This is not a situation where a few gangs of rag-tag militia are out of control. As everybody here knows, it has been a military operation from start to finish.” The official was speaking from the UN compound in which the UN observers, the last few reporters, and thousands of terrified Timorese finally took refuge, beseiged by Indonesia’s paramilitary agents. At that time, a few days ago, t…
