---
title: "“A Light Amidst the Darkness”"
author: "Kauan Willian dos Santos"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kauan-willian-dos-santos-a-light-amidst-the-darkness"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "lessons from the anticlericalist struggle of the past century in Brazil for today and its Connections with the material and antifascist struggle"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kauan-willian-dos-santos-a-light-amidst-the-darkness.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kauan-willian-dos-santos-a-light-amidst-the-darkness.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anticlericalism and Syndicalism        Anticlericalism and Antifascism        Final Considerations        Bibliography “The criticism of religion is, therefore, the germ of the criticism of the vale of tears, of which religion is the halo.” – Karl Marx “It is of no use to call ourselves and consider ourselves atheists; as long as we have not understood these causes.” – Mikhail Bakunin “Methodism was the arid inner landscape of utilitarianism in an age of transition to the discipline of labor under industrial capitalism.” – Edward Thompson “Jesus entered the temple, drove out all those who were buying and selling in the temple, and overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who were selling doves.” – Matthew 21:12-13 In 1901, in the city of São Paulo, the first issue of the periodical A Lanterna was launched. Produced at Rua da Quitanda, No. 2, and released by the Anticlerical Organ of São Paulo, it was initially distributed for free, later accepting donations, and eventually offering subscriptions at varying prices. The publication consisted of four pages filled with images and illustrations, often with supplements, mostly written in Portuguese, with columns in Italian and Spanish. It was launched by a lawyer and free-thinker, Benjamin Mota, one of the central figures of the labor movement during that period. In both its first phase, until 1904, and its second, which began in 1909 under Edgard Leuenroth, a famous anarchist and syndicalist from the city, the newspaper had a circulation of between 10,000 and 15,000 copies—a figure comparable to the major press outlets. As a result, it had an extensive network of contacts, including in Minas Gerais, Santa Catarina, Pernambuco, and Paraná, and connections in Argentina, Italy, and Spain (ANDRADE, 2009). In addition to real and practical denunciations against alleged abuses by priests and members of the Catholic Church, particularly against children and women, the periodical also became a target for the authorities, while also receiving support from other major press outlets. Opposing the papacy, the newspaper brought together, as scholars of A Lanterna have noted, groups that sought to undermine or attack catholicism, such as freemasons and jews. By advocating for "freedom of thought" and "progress," it could unite political factions that shared these notions, such as republicans, socialists, and anarchists (POLETTO, 2017). Could it be that “anticlericalism [was] a specifically bourgeois distortion, consciously designed to divert the attention of the masses by organizing quasi-liberal crusades against clericalism” ,as defined in 1909 by the bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin? In this text, we will explore some aspects of the anticlerical struggle, particularly through the periodical A Lanterna, showing how this struggle was an important aspect not only in attacking one of the forms of domination that prevailed in Brazil at that time but also in the very construction of the labor movement and class consciousness, as well as the gathering of progressive tendencies during that period. Thus, we consider it a mistake that there was no subsequent insistence on a struggle or debate regarding the role of religions in the class struggle, in the organization of workers, and in their thoughts, including the role of religion against other faiths and the erasure of minority cultures and beliefs. Today, we live in a time of the rise and growing power of neo-Pentecostal religions that put democracy at risk and strengthen fascism, authoritarianism, and moralism. The anticlerical struggle of the past can provide us with answers and clues on how to act in response to this. Since the 18th century in Europe, the secularizing movement, which positioned the State and the emerging Republic in opposition to the influence of the Catholic Church, gained traction and influenced various demands, whether of a popular nature or within intellectual circles. Adapted by various politica…
