---
title: "Climate Disruption, Political Stability, and Collective Imagination"
author: "Ole Martin Sandberg"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ole-martin-sandberg-climate-disruption-political-stability-and-collective-imagination"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Radical Philosophy Review Volume 23 Issue 2 2020 https://doi.org/10.5840/radphilrev2020324108"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ole-martin-sandberg-climate-disruption-political-stability-and-collective-imagination.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ole-martin-sandberg-climate-disruption-political-stability-and-collective-imagination.epub"
    hosted: false
---

   Visions of the Apocalypse    Effective Affect: Between Realism and Idealism    Trajectories for the Future    Climate Disruption, Political Stability    Managing the Present Crises    Another Present is Possible    Collective Imagination    Bibliography Anthropogenic climate change cannot be meaningfully denied. What's worse, it cannot be prevented. Theoretically, we might be able to slow it down and keep it at a more or less manageable level. According to the models of the IPCC, it is still "possible within the laws of chemistry and physics" to keep global warming within the level they consider vital (1.5ºC from pre-industrial temperatures) but it would require "unprecedented transitions in all aspects of society." [1] Given that global CO2 emissions have been steadily rising despite the Paris Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol, there seems to be little hope that such transitions are likely to happen any time soon. We can therefore expect global warming to accelerate with disastrous consequences for ecosystems and human societies. How bad these consequences will be depends on two factors that are both very hard to predict. The first is the level of warming and the changes to the natural world that result from it. These things are hard to model because the Earth's climate is a complex system with many feedback loops and tipping points that can accelerate the process in a non-linear trajectory. [2] For example, even if anthropogenic emissions were to be completely stopped, the warming that we have already caused is currently leading to loss of sea and polar ice. As the ice melts, greenhouse gasses stored in the permafrost are released leading to further emissions. Ice also reflects solar radiation, so the loss of polar ice in itself leads to higher temperatures. A tipping point is reached when the process we have started initiates other processes beyond our control. Some of the consequences to the natural world are known, as they are already happening: More severe and more frequent droughts, heat waves, and forest fires in parts of the world, increased flooding and rising water levels in other parts, loss of habitat for animals, increased ocean acidification, more frequent and violent hurricanes, to name just a few. For humans, some places will become uninhabitable and there will be increased food insecurity. This is already happening. The question is how bad it will get. The second factor is how human societies respond to these changes, i.e. how we adapt politically and socially to a changing natural world. The birth and growth of the industrialized world of capitalist nation-states was dependent upon exploitation of the Earth's resources and thus changed the planet and now its own continued existence depends upon how it changes in response to the changes it caused. Human society and behavior are arguably even more unpredictable, complex, and hard to model than the Earth's climate system. It too consists of many interconnected factors, feedback loops, and tipping points. This paper discusses some of the models that have already been proposed, and it examines how the political, economic, and social forces have responded to disasters in the recent past, in order to show which tendencies we should expect to see more of in the near future. But a central claim is that these models themselves can be part of the "feedback loops" that push the sociopolitical processes in one direction or the other. A prediction of the future is an intervention in the present where the tracks for that future are laid. Rejecting both political "idealism" and "realism," I draw upon affect theory to argue that our embodied, emotional reactions to the fact of climate change have an impact on our ability to act on climate change. I start by describing the widespread sense of doom that permeates both climate science and popular culture. Both scientific think tanks and Hollywood fiction are, in their respective ways, drawing from and promoting a particular i…
