---
title: "Five unexpected signs you may be an anarchist"
author: "Pramen"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pramen-five-unexpected-signs-you-may-be-an-anarchist"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 12th August 2020 from https://pramen.io/en/2018/04/five-unexpected-signs-you-may-be-an-anarchist/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "pramen-five-unexpected-signs-you-may-be-an-anarchist.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pramen-five-unexpected-signs-you-may-be-an-anarchist.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       You consider freedom to be the highest virtue        You practice genuine compassion        Your lifestyle is courage-based as opposed to fear-based        You pressure boundaries into becoming horizons        You are proactive and working diligently to undermine the powers-that-be “Anarchy doesn’t mean out of control; it means out of their control.” –Jim Dodge Anarchy’s success as a form of egalitarian governance is undermined by all forms of hierarchical government. Anarchy is uncomfortable, but anarchy is natural. The only thing worse than the egalitarian governance of anarchy, is hierarchical government. This is because anarchy tends to prevent power from becoming centralized by an individual (king, plutocrat) or group (oligarchs, bankers, monopolizing corporations), whereas power inevitably becomes centralized by an individual or group within a hierarchical government. In short: anarchy may be uncomfortable, but at least it prevents power from corrupting absolutely; and living in a hierarchical government may be comfortable, but such comfort is not worth power corrupting in the hands of a select few while the majority suffer from being powerless. Basically it comes down to this: uncomfortable freedom trumps comfortable slavery. Governing the precept that egalitarian anarchy has carried us through millions of years of human evolution, it stands to reason that such painstaking trial and error should be taken into greater consideration. The majority of us can agree that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely, but then the majority of us get hung up on anarchy (probably due to years of negative government propaganda) being the only method that we know of to prevent power from corrupting. It’s a tricky flavor of cognitive dissonance that most people aren’t even aware of. And the powers-that-be definitely don’t want us to become aware of it, because they want to stay in power, which requires us to remain powerless. They could care less if it corrupts absolutely, as long as it is absolutely theirs. Anarchy flips the tables on power, and that is precisely why the powers-that-be are scared of it. Here are five signs that you may be waking up to these facts, and may already be an anarchist. “The only way to deal with an un-free world is to become so absolutely free that your very existence is an act of rebellion.” –Albert Camus You prefer dangerous freedom over peaceful slavery. You are not nihilistic or chaotic like the propagandized media with their bipartisan claptrap claim anarchists to be. You are simply free, and refuse to be controlled or ruled over. You are okay with rules, but not rulers. Rules surround us everywhere within the realm of cosmic law, after all. Your self-control is paramount so you can grow and thrive within the interconnected realm of cosmic law. You realize that the state’s lack of self-control is precisely the reason that it wants to control you. It rules you out of fear. The strength it takes for you to be free is precisely what the state despises and fears. You piss on their contempt. You laugh in the face of their fear. You are free dammit! And no one, whether they are a single authority or the so-called authority of the state, is going to change that. After all, it’s better to be an unsatisfied freeman than a satisfied slave. As such, you are here to set free as many unfree people as possible. You are here to unshackle the shackled, and unfetter the fettered by being so absolutely free that the state trembles when you walk over it toward a new and rising sun. Through malicious doublespeak the state claims that you are free, but you are onto their lies. You understand that when they say, “You are free as long as we’re in charge and protecting you” that they are just pathetically clinging to their own power, that they want nothing more than to keep you powerless and dependent upon them. But as Simone De Beauvoir said, “A freedom that is interested only in denying freedom must be de…
