---
title: "Arsons against Bristol’s cellular transmission infrastructure"
author: "Live Wires — FAI/ELF"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/live-wires-fai-elf-arsons-against-bristol-s-cellular-transmission-infrastructure"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;actforfree.nostate.net/?p=17043&gt;. Retrieved on 19/07/2024 from lib.anarhija.net."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "live-wires-fai-elf-arsons-against-bristol-s-cellular-transmission-infrastructure.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/live-wires-fai-elf-arsons-against-bristol-s-cellular-transmission-infrastructure.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Around Bristol between June 9 th -10 th , we left 7 mobile phone antennae in flames. Daily continuation of capitalist society is dependent on uninterrupted flows (of goods, people, data, and energy) and the communications grid is no exception. The limited uses most of us can make from these flows only mask the way they are mainly used to oversee and impose the dominant order, and increase its’ reach and control. You need only look to how the values of connectivity, speed, and that are embodied in a mobile phone (for example) facilitate a relentless consumer culture and the requirement to be available and flexible at all times: as much for the benefit of the boss and the advertiser as for your family or friends. This is fully consistent with the modern restructuring and decentralisation of the gigantic productive system which this society subjects us to. Hindering all this was our objective. 2 antennae went up simultaneously, in Hambrook and outside Ram Hill business park in Coalpit Heath, both owned by O2. This is also not the first time O2 have been singled out for damage acts because of the contracts they hold in the migrant detention industry, with cops, and tagging for the probation service. Some hours later a 3 rd O2 antenna went up in Coombe Dingle, at the same time as a 4 th fire was lit after gaining to transmission units connected to the huge BT telecommunication tower in Lockleaze. Signals that will have been affected are those of O2, T-Mobile, Orange and Vodaphone. These corporations variously are connected to the field of military equipment and armament, use prison labour, and are famous for readily collaborating with electronic policing by the secret services (now that widespread data-surveillance is well known) while not even stopping at financing Oxford university with its’ extensive animal experimentation labs. This has already led to their interests being attacked in Berlin (T-Mobile’s parent company*), Paris ( ), and Banbury (Vodaphone ). For all above reasons it is always good to harm these corporations, structurally and economically, and then there is the issue of the antennae themselves radiating who knows how much harmfulness to nearby species. There were the publicised cases in Bristol even some years ago of a in Shirehampton who complained of the affects of an antenna put up on her high rise flatblock and later died from a brain tumor, while an antenna nicknamed The Tower of Doom was withdrawn from Staple Hill after cancer rates soared. Evidence has mounted up that prolonged use of mobile phones damages the immune system, decreases fertility, and causes brain tumors and cancers: especially in the young. We should mention that the antenna we burned in Coombe Dingle is one of three on the grounds of a university sports pitch also marketed for schools, as are many others. Additionally, twisted lab technicians to have deduced from experimentation on other mammals (built on torture like so much scientific research) that exposure while still in the womb “ significantly damages brain function, structure and behaviour and suggested that these exposures could contribute to children’s behavioural disorders ”. These products were and still are pushed on us as harmless, although nearly every study that claims this was funded by the industry itself, when we had no idea of the long term affects, similarly to the marketing of asbestos or smoking before they began to show their deadly toll (to use only 2 better known examples among thousands). These days even researchers at Bristol university concede the dangers of cellular use. What a surprise…. The permanently wired environment turns out to be toxic, while companies make a killing in profits and the government receives billions in taxes and licensing. For most people prolonged contact with mobile phones or in general seems unavoidable, for work or to avoid social marginalisation, in the street, on public transport, or at home: we are soaking in one more accumulative …
