---
title: "Does Earth First! Need a 12-Step?"
author: "Avalon"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/avalon-does-earth-first-need-a-12-step"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "‘Dear Shit for Brains’ (SFB) is the title of the Letter to the Editor section of the Earth First! Journal. Earth First! Journal, Litha 1996, Page 3 &amp; 28. &lt;www.environmentandsociety.org/sites/default/files/key_docs/ef_16_6_1.pdf&gt; Plus, Earth First! Journal, August-September 1996, Page 3 &am"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "avalon-does-earth-first-need-a-12-step.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/avalon-does-earth-first-need-a-12-step.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Letter replies “At Wounded Knee, there was absolutely no drinking but after that it was all drugs and alcohol, which weren’t so much an obstacle to taking action as an impediment to an effective organization, and also something that compromised our public positions.” —Dennis Banks, American Indian Movement A familiar routine occurs every Friday and Saturday night. As it grows dark, state and county parks fill with people and the sounds of hard rock, soft rock and acid rock reverberating off the native rocks. Through habit and a turn of a knob, escapees from urban environments mask over the sounds of crickets and wind in the trees. Soon flames from campfires leap high into the air, threatening to set nearby trees on fire—no doubt to keep the already comfortable summer night from being so scary. And finally, the Schlitz-induced rowdiness completes the taming of these “primitive” places making the landscape once again familiar. Earth First! gatherings suffer from the same disregard for the night and our surroundings. We are prisoners of our own maladjusted habits, circumscribing our time together with booze. True, we hike a little farther from our vehicles. True, we leave our radios behind. But we go to Herculean (Haydukian) efforts to carry in ludicrous amounts of libations. And the sounds of the night are overlain by the obnoxious chants and dominating rants of inebriated individuals. I envision a different way of coming together to mourn our losses and celebrate our connections. Every child is able to play, to feel deeply, to form bonds, without any need for booze. I’ve been on countless wilderness trips where the absence of alcohol created an atmosphere where adults explored the world more freely and with more intensity. As a movement we have taken an essential step towards this vision by rejecting the music of the consumer culture at our gatherings. We have created our own songs which reach across human boundaries to help us connect more deeply with the natural world. Earth First! songs speak of lively resistance to a culture out of control. And I submit that the absence of radios and tape decks around the campfire has allowed musical creativity to flourish. What if there was a similar absence of alcohol? Our music is our strength, but our beer guzzling is our weakness. On one Wild Rockies Day, vast numbers of people and vast quantities of alcohol traveled up into the mountains—at least a five hour drive each way involving equally vast quantities of gasoline—to party late into the night, then wake up and immediately drive home. Because the organizers had provided a familiar routine — tap the keg, hang out by the fire and get drunk — no one seemed to have any real contact with that place. Like snowbirds watching TV in their RVs at night, we used that place as just another scenic backdrop. Even if it is the almighty microbrew, we are still trying to drown out the stillness of the night and the awkwardness of being together. We do the same thing that every fraternity, every sailor on shore leave does — except we export out self-absorbed drunkenness to the woods. Most of us would cringe at the thought of frat boys invading a sacred place like a cave or hotsprings with cases of beer. So why is there this silent acceptance of the frat boy mentality when Earth First! is supposed to be visionary, pronouncing the sacredness of all wild places? A rendezvous should not be an excuse to party; it should be a time of coming together as a community. Alcohol leads imbibers to focus on each other, excluding both the non-drinkers and the natural inhabitants of the place. People who are new to EF! are put off by the rowdy cliques of drunks. The whole scene is a direct affront to recovering alcoholics, children of alcoholics and people uninterested in sophomoric antics. There is nothing redeeming, for instance, in jumping naked over a fire. It is sheer human arrogance, showing contempt for the power of the elements and the sacred gift of…
