---
title: "Council Communism Study Circle"
author: "Counseling Communism"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/counseling-communism-council-communism-study-circle-dutch-german-communist-left-study-guide"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Dutch/German Communist Left Study Guide"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "counseling-communism-council-communism-study-circle-dutch-german-communist-left-study-guide.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/counseling-communism-council-communism-study-circle-dutch-german-communist-left-study-guide.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction          Who Were the Council Communists?        Module 1 — Overview and Origins          Session 1 — An overview of the history of the Dutch/German council movement          Session 2 — Left Communism in Germany        Module 2 — Dialogue with the Third International          Session 1 — The 3 rd International Response          Session 2 — Gorter’s Response to the Bolsheviks          Session 3 — Ruhle’s Response to the Bolsheviks          Session 4 — Councilists in England        Module 3 — The Political Economy of Council Communism          Session 1 — Introducing the Fundamental Principles          Session 2 — The Fundamental Principles of Communsit Production and Distribution        Module 4 — Council Communism, Fully Formed          Session 1 — Council Communism, Fully Formed (Part 1)          Session 2 — Council Communism, Fully Formed (Part 2)          Session 3 — Council Communism, Fully Formed (Part 3)          Session 4 — Council Communism, Fully Formed (Part 4)        Module 5 — The Late Councilists          Session 1 — Monopoly Capitalism and State Socialism          Session 2 — Anti-Bolshevik Communism        Module 6 — Council Communism and the Communist Left          Session 1 — The New Left Movements          Session 2 — Defining Left Communism          Session 3 — On failures        What Comes Next?          Further Readings A project of the Baltimore Libertarian Socialist Caucus, the Council Communism Study Circle met every two weeks from August 2020 until April 2021, brought together by an interest in exploring the ideas and history of the Dutch/German Radical Left. This tendency is criminally understudied and unknown within the left spaces that we often organize within, and many of us, after a summer both horrifying and hopeful, felt that we needed to learn more about a tendency of socialists and communists who took seriously the autonomy of the working class. We had active members from all across the country, from Baltimore to Atlanta to Cleveland to Seattle. The following is intended to help share some of what it was that we learned and to provide a map for others who might follow us. If you are curious, if you have heard of a worker’s council but don’t know what it means, if you feel stifled by the rigidity of social democracy, we hope you’ll take a look, find a group of comrades, and start engaging with these great texts. Who were the council communists, where did they go, and what is it that separated them from the social democrats, the leninists, and the anarchists that they stand apart from? Council Communism is one of the main currents of “left communist” thought. The left communists were the communists who, while often initially very supportive of the Soviet Union and the 3 rd International, ended up breaking away and criticizing it from the left. Very often they came to this critique for different reasons, which makes putting them all under the same label of “left communist” problematic in a post-soviet world, where there is no communist “center” to be “left” of. The Council Communists, then, as Dutch and German participants in the German SPD, were the radical left communists and socialists who saw the origin of the soviet, or worker’s council, in the Russian 1905 Revolution as the most important development in the struggle against capital. They saw tremendous power in this expression of the autonomy and will of the working class as a whole, Marx’s dictatorship of the proletariat (and importantly, not a party above the proletariat) made manifest. They started as a loose formation within the SPD, before forming the German Communist Party (KPD) after the Russian Revolution, which they saw as the advent of a real socialist movement building a council democracy. Refusing to collaborate with Social Democratic politicians and trade unions that had only months before viciously repressed strikes and outbreaks of the German Revolution, almost 80% of the KPD was expelled by its own centr…
