---
title: "GI Revolts: The Breakdown of the U.S. Army in Vietnam"
author: "Richard Boyle"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/richard-boyle-gi-revolts-the-breakdown-of-the-u-s-army-in-vietnam"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "GI Revolts: The Breakdown of the U.S. Army in Vietnam by Richard Boyle Published by United Front Press P.O. Box 40099, San Francisco, CA 94140 May, 1973. Note added October, 2010: An image version of this pamphlet is available in PDF from ZineLibrary at zinelibrary.info. Sections of the book Flower "
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "richard-boyle-gi-revolts-the-breakdown-of-the-u-s-army-in-vietnam.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/richard-boyle-gi-revolts-the-breakdown-of-the-u-s-army-in-vietnam.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Doc Hampton        Firebase Pace        Mutiny        The Grunts        Sen. Kennedy Goes All Out        Conclusion by the United Front Press staff        Stateside        Navy Rebellions The Vietnam War was one of the least popular in American history. It was also the least “popular” with the GI’s who were sent to fight it. By the late 1960’s, news of GI unrest was being carried on TV and in newspapers around the country and Vietnam vets were speaking at anti-war demonstrations. But word of the GI resistance in Vietnam itself trickled back more slowly — the soldiers flashing peace signs and Black Power salutes, the group refusals to fight, anti-war petitions and demonstrations, and even the fragging of officers. What we’ve read in the newspapers, however, has just been bits and pieces. Seldom have we had a chance to hear the whole story from the GI’s themselves. This pamphlet tells in vivid terms two stories of GI revolts — the shooting of a top sergeant and the mutiny of Bravo Company at Firebase Pace near Cambodia. They are taken from Richard Boyle’s book Flower of the Dragon — The Breakdown of the U.S. Army in Vietnam (Ramparts Press, 1972). Boyle spent three tours in Vietnam from 1965 through 1971 as a war correspondent, and was on hand personally to record many of these events as they happened. Not all of the stories of GI resistance told in Boyle’s book are as dramatic as the story of Doc Hampton or the mutiny at Firebase Pace. Boyle could only cover a few of the thousands of GI revolts in Vietnam. Many of these revolts were private affairs by GI’s who were strung out on dope, or scared, or angry at being ordered to risk their lives to capture a useless piece of real estate. But as the war dragged on, an increasing number of GI’s — like the men at Firebase Pace — felt they shouldn’t be in Vietnam in the first place, and turned to organized resistance. Resentment was especially high among Black and other minority GI’s, who were concentrated in combat units all out of proportion to their numbers in the population and were faced with continual racial harassment. The result, for the military, was devastating. By 1969 the morale and discipline of the U.S. ground forces in Indochina had so broken down that it was no longer a reliable fighting force. This fact was one of the major causes for the change in U.S. strategy. The U.S. government had no choice but to withdraw American troops. Nixon may call the Vietnam settlement “peace with honor.” But his alternative was war without an army. Here then is the GI’s eye-view of the Vietnam War. Although many of us in the Saigon press corps had heard rumors of fraggings attacks by enlisted men on officers with a fragmentation grenade, usually slipped under the floor of the officer’s hootch — it wasn’t being reported to the people back home. Then-President Lyndon Johnson, in response to the growing antiwar movement, once said, “You don’t hear the boys in Vietnam protesting.” Hawks consistently called for escalation “to support our boys.” To be against the war, they claimed, is to stab GIs in the back. The Army brass was particularly worried about stories of GI unrest leaking out. They did everything they could to cover up, and until 1969 they were successful. They covered up the story of the revolt in 1968 of black GIs at Long Binh Jail, the notorious Army prison outside Saigon. Fed up with abuse and beatings at the hands of the guards, black troops seized the prison, repelling successive attempts by hundreds of MPs backed up by armored cars to retake the prison. In the end, of course, the troops lost out. The easiest way for the Army to cover up news of GI unrest was simply not to report it at the five o’clock follies. (Note: this refers to newsmen’s skeptical name for the Army’s news briefings.) The Army’s massive PR machine daily cranked out press releases about how the GIs supported the war, how high their morale was and how we were gloriously winning the …
