---
title: "Class Rule Must Fall!"
author: "Leroy Maisiri"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leroy-maisiri-class-rule-must-fall"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "More Statues, More Working Class"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "leroy-maisiri-class-rule-must-fall.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/leroy-maisiri-class-rule-must-fall.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Symbols and Substance        Black Working Class        Empire Strikes Back        Colour and Class        Black Masters        More Working Class        University Elitism        Deep Transformation Slogans like “Erase Rhodes”, “Rhodes so White,” and Rhodes must Fall,” emerging from student groups at South Africa’s elite universities, recently monopolised social media. These have taken off, because South Africa is in need of great structural change; 20 years after the important 1994 transition, many black people remain trapped in oppressive conditions. No one would deny that during apartheid blacks, Coloureds and Indians were racially oppressed, abused, and as workers, exploited. If removing statues and changing place names can help solve the problems, and form part of a meaningful redress of past and present injustices, then such actions must be supported. But can such demands really do so? At a symbolic level, statue and name changes might provide some measure of comfort to those who have suffered. But it also appears that very few in these movements want to address the deeper problems, the oppression of the largely black working class – the majority, whose cheap labour lays the foundation for the wealth and power of the few. (By working class, I mean the group of people who do not have ownership or command over the means of “administration, coercion or production,” in line with the anarchist definition). The exclusion of most (working class) blacks, Coloured and Indians from expensive, elitist universities cannot be tackled without tackling the hostile class structure, which is propped up by a dismal township schooling system, massive poverty and unemployment, low wages and rising prices, and the long shadow of the apartheid past. This situation cannot be removed with cosmetic and symbolic changes. Renaming varsities and changing curricula in a few social science and philosophy areas would not address this mass exclusion, and it would not change the basically elitist nature of the system. It is easy to assert that, for example, Rhodes University, in Grahamstown, is “so white”, or a bastion of “white privilege,” focussing exclusively on racial inequality. Of course, racial prejudice and discrimination and the apartheid legacy are real and must be tackled. But when the problem is reduced to the attitudes of a few whites in the universities, or to curricula or to symbols, we end up ignoring the larger class gulf in the society. Partly this is a factor of the class nature of these movements, which are built largely on the tiny layers of students at elite universities – white and black – often from upper class backgrounds and schools. As a result, a blind eye has been turned to the neo-liberal policy model aiming to cut spending and to make universities profitable. Arguing for stressing class does not mean ignoring race, as some claim. It is very evident that the race and class you are born in still matters in South Africa: being black and working class opens you up, undefended, to a world of pain, as you are forced to withstand both class and racial oppression, only to simply reproduce yourself in that same exact position. How can the best-paid black rock-face miner, earning R12 500 monthly after bitter strikes, send his children to university education costing R150 000 for fees alone? Cecil John Rhodes (1853–1902) was a late 19 th century imperialist and mining capitalist, whose policies translated directly into the British wars in the areas now called Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe (formerly “Rhodesia”) and South Africa. The British Empire was racist, but its actions were shaped by the capitalist and state drive for profit and power – not an abstract drive to racial power. It crushed anyone in its way, including whites like the Irish, using whatever forces were available, including large numbers of black troops. Colonel Graham (namesake of “Grahamstown”) used such troops in the frontier wars, just as the British Empire a…
