---
title: "Becky Edelsohn: the first political hunger striker in America"
author: "Alexander Berkman"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-becky-edelsohn-the-first-political-hunger-striker-in-america"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Mother Earth, August 1914. Retrieved on 1st April 2021 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexander-berkman-becky-edelsohn-the-first-political-hunger-striker-in-america.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-becky-edelsohn-the-first-political-hunger-striker-in-america.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Hunger striking was first originated in Russia by political prisoners over thirty years ago, as a protest against the mistreatment and torture in prisons. It served to arouse the world to the brutalities practiced upon the imprisoned politicals, and it has helped in a great measure, to force the Russian government to make terms with the prisoners. The case that attracted the widest attention was the hunger strike, in 1888 of the politicals in the Siberian hard-labor prison at Akatui in protest against the flogging of a woman political prisoner, Mme. Sigida. The determination of the hunger strikers was such that six men slowly starved to death when finally the government was forced to give in to the strikers’ demand: the governor of the prison was removed. Hunger striking as a protest against political injustice—as differentiated from the treatment accorded within prison—originated with the English suffragettes. Every one knows with what wonderful effect. The militant women of Europe have made the powerful government of Great Britain the laughing stock of the world. If they had accomplished nothing else, they have demonstrated that the determination and will power of the strong personality, inspired by an ideal, is more potent than the strongest government. They have demonstrated this power both in its immediate and ultimate effects. The government was forced to pass the Cat-and-Mouse Act and no English suffragette need stay in prison more than three of four days, no matter what the sentence of the Court. But the ultimate effect is still more significant. It has broken down among the English women the fetichism of the law, the belief in the sanctity of authority. Whatever else the suffragettes may achieve, they can contribute no greater or more lasting service to the cause of true progress. Becky Edelsohn is the first political hunger striker in America. Only the willfully blind can fail to see the perfect justifiability and sound logic of her strike. Possessed of strong convictions and revolutionary temperament, of exceptional determination and courage, Becky refuses to compromise with the enemy. Is there any reason why any one should, except for weak considerations of personal safety and comfort? It is not given to the average to be strong and uncompromising. But Becky is not of the average. She is very exceptional—a strong personality, unusually gifted in mind and heart. Though a very young woman, about twenty-three, Becky Edelsohn has been active in the Anarchist movement for a number of years. Not indeed as a “leader,” nor even as speakers or writer, but as one of the soldiers in the ranks, whose unobtrusive devotion and out-of-the-spotlight work for the cause is the very soul of the more conspicuous activities. The Movement of the Unemployed of last winter found Becky within its ranks. The movement, started by a small group of obscure proletarians at the Ferrer School, at the very outset faced the problem of the lack of speakers from its own ranks. IT was in this manner that Frank Tanenbaum joined in the work. Similarly Becky Edelsohn came to the front, inner necessity and the demand for speakers causing her to ascend the public platform—her first experience of the king—at gatherings of the unemployed at various street corners of New York City, and later at Franklin Statue (Printers’ Row). Of good appearance and sympathetic voice, well versed in the subject matter of her talks, she proved effective and was soon much in demand as a speaker. She was repeatedly arrested at Franklin Statue, on one occasion for making a collection for the unemployed. She defended her own case before the magistrate, arguing that she had as much right to make collections for the hungry as has the Salvation Army. The Judge agreed with her, and she was discharged. Her case has since successfully served as a test of the right of Socialists and other speakers to make collections at their meetings, without interference by the police authorities. All …
