---
title: "Ayn Rand’s Second-Hand Ethics"
author: "JudgeSabo"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judgesabo-ayn-rand-s-second-hand-ethics"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Feigned Objectivity in the Objectivist Ethics"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "judgesabo-ayn-rand-s-second-hand-ethics.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judgesabo-ayn-rand-s-second-hand-ethics.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Summary of The Objectivist Ethics          1. The Objectivist Narrative on Philosophical History          2. Rand’s Idea of Value          3. Life (Survival) as the Ultimate Value          4. Value and “Higher” Forms of Life          5. Ethics for Man          In Review        A Critique of “The Objectivist Ethics”          1. Life isn’t even Rand’s ultimate value          2. Value, Existence, and Non-Existence          3. Valuing Life vs Valuing Your Own Life          4. Values and Immortality        Ayn Rand and the Dunning-Kruger Effect, or “I bet no one has ever tried applying reason to ethics before me”          Rand’s General Ethical Narrative          Ayn Rand and Aristotle          Ayn Rand vs “Mystics”          Ayn Rand vs “Neomystics”        Conclusion Ayn Rand is a fascinating figure in the history of right-wing laissez-faire politics. She was primarily known, and is still remembered today, as the author of the novels The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged , acting as a “radical for capitalism” even within a deeply capitalist society. For Rand, this was a matter of painting an unapologetic defense of capitalism. In contrast to other conservatives of the time who felt they needed to temper their praise of capitalism with calls for Christian compassion for the poor and condemnations of greed, Rand wanted to turn selfishness into a virtue. Rand’s novels served as vehicles for developing and presenting her kind of Nietzschean worldview, presenting our modern world as a kind of dystopia plagued by an altruistic moral system that rejects reason in favor of feelings like compassion, but is in reality really rooted in jealousy and hatred of the successful and inevitably leads to disaster. This is contrasted to the self-interested morality of her heroes, whose strength distinguishes them from the rest of mankind who are dependent upon them, but are permitted to look up at them in admiration, and who would enjoy fantastic wealth if only the government would get out of the way of business. It was fundamental to Rand’s worldview that there really was this kind of contrast. The state of the world, and of ethical philosophy in general, was in such a sorry state that suggesting “Hey, what if we tried to apply reason to ethics?” would count as some great new philosophical innovation on her part. Believing she represented some break with the rest of philosophy, she named her own system of thought “Objectivism” because it was based on ‘objective reality.’ [1] She wrote many books and essays to develop this further, claiming that by reason she was coherently answering all major questions with regard to metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, politics, and aesthetics. It promised her followers a kind of ‘round universe.’ [2] “Objectivism” is, as I will show, mostly nonsense. What Rand presents as a triumph of reason was, if anything, a triumph of rhetoric. Her strongest arguments were just unoriginal, usually just poorly understood versions of Lockean political philosophy, while her original arguments were effectively always original errors, like how we can distinguish her Non-Initiation Principle as derivative but not identical with John Stuart Mill’s much earlier Harm Principle . Her radical language was very clearly influenced by Nietzsche, while her basic ethics is clearly just taken from Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics . Normally I would not be so negative on someone merely for being influenced by thinkers who came before them. We all develop within society and we build on the work of the generations that came before us. However, Rand was in complete denial about her intellectual debt to any philosopher, except to Aristotle’s logic. [3] It was vital to her worldview to deny any such debt since that would directly conflict with the narrative of her books, namely that she is presenting some radical new philosophy that would save the world but which everyone else is opposed to. Any discussion Rand gives of the history of philosophy nee…
