---
title: "Bloodstained"
author: "Cornelius Castoriadis, Paul Mattick, Barry Pateman, Emma Goldman, Otto Rühle, Ida Mett, Maurice Brinton, Alexander Berkman, Iain McKay, Nestor Makhno, Rudolf Rocker, Luigi Fabbri"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/friends-of-aron-baron-bloodstained"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "One Hundred Years Of Leninist Counterrevolution"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "friends-of-aron-baron-bloodstained.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/friends-of-aron-baron-bloodstained.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Dedication      Epigraph      Introduction by The Friends of Aron Baron      Anarchy and “Scientific” Communism by Luigi Fabbri        I. The bourgeois phraseology of “scientific” communism        II. The State and the Centralisation of Production        III. The “Provisional” Dictatorship and the State        IV. Anarchy and Communism        V. The Russian Revolution and the Anarchists      The Soviet System or the Dictatorship of the Proletariat? by Rudolf Rocker        Revolutionary Syndicalism and the Idea of Councils        The “Dictatorship of the Proletariat,” an Inheritance from the Bourgeoisie        Jacobin Traditions and Socialism        Everything for the Councils      The Idea of Equality and the Bolsheviks by Nestor Makhno      The State and Revolution: Theory and Practice by Iain McKay        Theory        The Paris Commune        Opportunism        Anarchism        Socialism        The Party        Practice        The State and the Soviets        The State and Socialism        The State and Civil War        The State and the Masses        Alternatives        Conclusions      A Decade of Bolshevism by Alexander Berkman      Preface to Ida Mett’s “The Kronstadt Commune” by Maurice Brinton      The Kronstadt Commune by Ida Mett        The Kronstadt Events        1. Background to the Kronstadt insurrection        2. Petrograd on the Eve of Kronstadt          Analysis of the Kronstadt Programme        3. Mass meetings and Bolshevik slanders          Mass Meetings          The Provisional Committee          Bolshevik Slanders        4. Effects on the Party Rank and File        5. Threats, Bribes and Skirmishes          Threats and Bribes          Support in Petrograd          First Skirmishes        6. Demoralisation in the Red Army          Reorganisation        7. The Final Assault          The Balance Sheet        8. What they said at the time          The Anarchists          The Mensheviks          The right S.R.s.          The left S.R.s.          Lenin’s Views          Petrichenko’s Evidence        9. Kronstadt: last upsurge of the Soviets          Trotsky’s Accusations          The Bolshevik interpretations          Rosa Luxembourg’s view’s          A third Soviet Revolution      The Struggle Against Fascism Begins with the Struggle Against Bolshevism by Otto Ruhle        I.        II.        III.        IV.        V.        VI.        VII.      My Disillusionment in Russia—Afterword by Emma Goldman        I        II        III        IV      Cries In The Wilderness: Alexander Berkman and Russian Prisoner Aid by Barry Pateman      Bolshevism and Stalinism by Paul Mattick        Competitors for Power        The Bolsheviks and Mass Spontaneity        The Party ‘Machine’        Trotsky, Apologist for Stalinism        The Result: State Capitalism      The Role of Bolshevik Ideology in the Birth of the Bureaucracy by Cornelius Castoriadis        [1. The Significance of the Russian Revolution]        [2. The Main Questions]        [3. The Traditional “Answers”]        [4. Bureaucracy in the Modern World]          [A. Modern Capitalist Countries]          [B . Economically Backward Countries]          [C . Russia]        [5. The Working Class in the Russian Revolution]        [6. Bolshevik Policy]        [7. The Management of Production]        [8. On “Ends” and “Means”]      Publishing Information Aron Baron was born into a poor Jewish family in the Kiev province of the Ukraine in July, 1891. He was sent to Siberia following the 1905 Revolution and eventually made it to the United States in 1912. In Chicago he met his first wife, Fanya, and was active with the Russian Workers Union and the Industrial Workers of the World. They returned to the Ukraine in 1917. Baron was an editor of the Nabat journal and participant in the movement of the same name. He was an active speaker and organizer. The arrests and imprisonment by the Cheka for Baron’s revolutionary agitation began in 1919, and never seemed to end. In Sep…
