---
title: "Mutual Aid Self/Social Therapy"
author: "The Jane Addams Collective"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-jane-addams-collective-mutual-aid-self-social-therapy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "static1.squarespace.com/static/6085aebac95858245004f52d/t/6085df64ccc2a078c8fb2a74/1619386217285/mast-book.pdf"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-jane-addams-collective-mutual-aid-self-social-therapy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-jane-addams-collective-mutual-aid-self-social-therapy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-jane-addams-collective-mutual-aid-self-social-therapy)

Generating Beliefs, Intermediate Beliefs, and Automatic Thoughts

“It is the conscience — be it only at the stage of an instinct — of human solidarity. It is the unconscious recognition of the force that is borrowed by each man from the practice of mutual aid; of the close dependency of every one’s happiness upon the happiness of all; and of the sense of justice, or equity, which brings the individual to consider the rights of every other individual as equal to her own.”

The Jane Addams Collective formed as a response to the needs of radical activists for community mental health support. We wanted to rely on each other for this instead of traditional therapy or psychiatry, in part, because the activity of working together to address our common problems was an opportunity to build our community stronger. We saw it as a way to not only help each other with immediate and chronic problems, but as a way to start to trust each other with intimacy and vulnerability, as a way to say that the new society we are trying to build should not have shame about emotional honesty.

In our attempts to build MAST, our goal has been to help ourselves and others learn skills to help us survive, skills that can be used for the rest of our lives to be strong and well. This is the self-therapy part of MAST. We believe psychological health can be a revolutionary process. Maintaining a healthy and open sanity in a repressive and insane society is part of a sustainable resistance to the status quo. We seek new ways for our community to provide “therapy” by the community that reflect our ideals. MAST is just one part of this ecology of mutual support and responsibility.

MAST is an open-source and evolving set of cognitive techniques aimed at promoting better emotional health for individuals in a non-hierarchical and non-pathological model. MAST draws heavily upon the techniques found in Rational Emotive Therapy, Existential Psychology, Cognitive Behavioral Techniques, Dialectical Behavioral Therapy and related systems. We have also recently employed Symbolic Techniques in the process. The focus of MAST is to teach techniques of self- reflection and addressing problems that can allow individuals to make positive changes in their emotional lives. Though MAST is at its core self-therapy, it relies on the power of small groups (triads or teams) of peers to support the individual as they gain self-confidence using MAST tools. Participants in MAST alternate between counselor and counseled so that they gain a better understanding of each aspect of MAST. The fluidity between roles in the peer group ultimately results in healthier participants with the skills to support others in our radical communities and elsewhere. MAST rejects the traditional hierarchical roles in the mental health system and instead creates a more immersive and experiential understanding of the techniques. It also rejects the proprietary and professionalism of support in modern therapy by encouraging participants to add to MAST theory and practice.

MAST neither is traditional psychotherapy nor is it group therapy. MAST uses the principle of mutual aid and a growing open-source collection of techniques to help overcome emotional difficulties in people’s lives. MAST is not a substitute, nor does it seek to undermine, traditional psychotherapy and psychiatry but to provide a sensible, experimental and effective self-therapy based on a more radical ethics. MAST was started by mental health professionals but seeks to create an effective and supportive practice to improve our mental lives together with other people sharing their desire for a radical change in society. In short, we strive take into consideration the mental and emotion struggle which coincides with our action and organizing.

It is not uncommon for revolutionaries and radicals of all stripes to devote time, money and energy to self-defense classes in preparation for physical encounters with the State and other antagonists. Self-defense has been an important characteristic of the revolutionary project. However, physical preparedness is only one part of true self-defense. Mental health is all too often ignored as a necessity for engaging in sustainable radical projects. Most predictably, this oversight has seriously compromised the effectiveness of our resistance, and it has also limited the social relationships we build and our ability to create genuine and powerful communities. This oversight is a complex combination of stigma and well-founded suspicion of current mental health models and industries, as well as a consequence of inadequate access to mental health services under capitalism. We must find a way to overcome these obstacles and explore modes to strengthen our mental health to refuse the reproduction of the the violent system that we live in, and to continue to challenge white supremacy, capitalism, and patriarchy.

It would be naive to believe that dysfunctional and oppressive social structures only affect us in physical and material ways while leaving our emotions and behaviors unaffected. It is equally naive to believe that mental health models that directly benefit from these unjust and oppressive societal structures offer the best advice to bolster a radical community’s mental self-defense and health. All too often, repressive societies have used the rubric of mental health to coerce, and at times punish, those who oppose domination and coercion; so it is natural for revolutionaries to be skeptical of therapy in general. We all know oppressive forces routinely use physical force, but this doesn’t mean we inherently reject physical means to pursue our goals. Radical therapy’s goal should not be assimilating the individual to the status quo, but allowing the individual to regain autonomy over their emotions and behaviors and allow them to work in communities to promote these goals.

Radical therapies must respect the political goals of the participants. MAST is one therapy that highlights autonomy and anti-authoritarian modes of allowing individuals to manage their emotions and behaviors in a way they find productive and gratifying. Radical therapies should seek to create situations where people can freely work out emotional and behavioral obstacles that affect their ability to form relationships and resistance. Therapy need not only be reactive, focusing on damage already done, but can also be preventive, preparing an individual for future stressors, oppression or difficulties. MAST is not so much about repairing damage but mastering tools to be emotionally and behaviorally intentional and autonomous.

MAST deconstructs traditional cognitive therapeutic techniques by considering them using the frameworks of radical political praxis. MAST rejects the hierarchy and static roles of therapist and patient, and replaces them with a learning community where roles intentionally change. Narrators (the name for those being counseled) become supporters (name for those doing the counseling) and vice versa creating a more holistic and egalitarian social relationship that is at odds with the specialist paradigm of cognitive psychology. MAST draws on group therapy and peer support networks tools to create community environments instead of traditional dyadic models found in all therapeutic models including cognitive ones. MAST practices extreme transparency as part of its model by presenting all the tools of MAST prior to them being used in a session combined with participants experiencing both using the tools to help others and the tools being used by others to help them. This approach completely demystifies the process and goals of the sessions. MAST focuses on autonomy and its tools resist the creation of dependency relationships so common in therapeutic settings. This is done by removing the dyad model and creating different group configurations. MAST focuses on the power of the community to provide support as opposed to specialists or charismatic individuals. MAST teaches tools to laypeople and allows them to use them in a way to help others and, eventually, themselves. MAST allows the group, and the individuals involved, to create the community standards of the program, and to consider ways to hold each other accountable in order to create an open and intimate environment free of mandatory “reporting.”

MAST is free and voluntary, removing material considerations, coercive financial structures and creating an open atmosphere for exploration and mastery. MAST is an open system. It seeks to evolve and change with each session, rejecting static or dogmatic solutions. MAST is primarily based on cognitive psychology but is heterogeneous enough to use tools from other modes and influences. MAST allows problems to be located in a number of places, not just the individual as is in traditional psychotherapy, and allows for ongoing political analysis and criticism of current social structures in society. The infusion of radical critiques and ideas inform every aspect of the MAST experience, which is an explicit political project. MAST can be easily replicated without need for significant money, time or energy nor does it require obtaining permission from specialists or a governing body. MAST is not exclusive; it is just one set of tools among many.

Mutual Aid Self-Therapy is based on the principles of cognitive psychology and insights from cognitive neurology. MAST is interested in the way emotions and behaviors manifest from the brain into individuals’ lives. This section will explain how the neurological processes in the brain create various psychological states and how one can control these processes.

Precursors of certain fundamental aspects of cognitive therapy have been identified in various Western philosophical traditions, particularly the Hellenic Stoics. The Stoics understand theorized that the “reality” of the world was secondary to the interpretation of the world by the mind. Furthermore, two of the particularly famous Stoics, Seneca and Zeno, emphasized that destructive emotions resulted from errors in judgment, and that a person of “moral and intellectual perfection” could avoid experiencing unpleasant emotions. The Stoics believed in the individual’s ability to control their will, and argued that one’s emotions and reactions to those emotions (behavior) could be freed from external circumstances.

The Stoics’ philosophy, with its emphasis on the subjective and active creation of one’s emotional state and reaction (behavior), found renewed interest among the existentialists of the 1950’s. Post- war philosophers, especially in France, were confronted with explaining an irrational and brutal world where something like the Holocaust could be implemented in a civilized nation like Germany. The Western world was engulfed in an apocalyptic strategy of Mutual Assured Destruction (MAD) during the Cold War. How could one understand their life while living in the “Society of the Absurd”? For the existentialists, namely Sartre and Camus, the answer laid in consciously changing one’s mindset just as the Stoics taught.

Existential psychology and rational psychology took ideas from the philosophy of Sartre and Camus and started to apply them to psychology and, specifically, therapy. In the mid-1950’s, influential psychiatrist Dr. Albert Ellis revolutionized therapy with Rational Emotive Therapy (RET). Ellis, who was influenced by his readings of the Stoics and friendship with Sartre, believed that “the mechanisms of the brain can be transformed” by creating new paradigms (thought patterns) that would lead to individuals being able to change both their emotions and behaviors consciously. Ellis rejected Freudian psychoanalysis and other psycho-dynamic approaches, arguing that with deliberate and conscious application of reason one could change their own emotional and behavioral state. Ellis argued famously that “people and events do not create psychological wounds but interpretations of stimuli do.” Ellis argued that if we changed our interpretation of events and people, it would necessarily change our emotional states (which in turn would change our behavior). His insights and techniques led directly to the cognitive therapy revolution in the US and Europe.

Cognitive therapy is a type of short-term psychotherapy developed in the 1960’s by American psychiatrist Dr. Aaron Beck. Cognitive therapy is based on the cognitive model, which states that thoughts, feelings and behavior are all interconnected, and that individuals can move toward overcoming difficulties and meeting their goals by identifying and changing unhelpful or inaccurate thinking, problematic behavior, and distressing emotional responses.

To understand the interconnection between thought and emotional/behavioral response, one needs to understand two neurological systems: the limbic system and the cortex. The limbic system is a set of brain structures located on both sides of the thalamus, right under the cerebrum. The limbic system supports a variety of functions including emotion, behavior, and motivation. Emotional life is largely housed in the limbic system. It is the gatekeeper for the autonomic nervous system, which is most notably responsible for the “fight or flight” reaction in many organisms. The limbic system is responsible for the regulation of bodily responses to emotions, activated by adrenaline and over 131 other biochemical compounds. When the limbic system is activated, an emotion and subsequent behavior is chemically induced in the organism.

The cerebral cortex is a collection of systems on the outer layer of the human brain. It is responsible for “higher functions” like thought, problem-solving and pattern recognition. It is here that we develop patterns and beliefs about the world. As other parts of the brain receive stimuli from the world, the cerebral cortex interprets the data and, if needed, activates the limbic system based on the interpretation. The limbic system can be activated positively, negatively or left in a waiting (neutral) state. Each of these states will release different biochemicals into the brain and body.

While it is impossible for one to consciously change the triggering of the limbic system at the time of the stimuli (because it happens so quickly), cognitive therapists seek to change the analysis happening in the cortex ahead of time, so the next time a similar stimuli occurs, the command to the limbic is something different. Cognitive therapy is about having the cortex change its analysis of something negative to either a neutral or even possibly a positive (you can also change a positive to a neutral or negative which is related to adverse conditioning). However, the problem with this mechanistic approach is that it is not very precise. Cognitive therapists bypass the reduction of behavior to the cortex by focusing on the patterns, assumptions and/or beliefs that underlie the cortical analysis. This allows a person to consciously change how they will analyze and interpret a series of relational stimuli, which then will affect the activation of the limbic system. The ability to change a belief, and to substitute it with alternative beliefs, allows a person to gain some control over maladaptive neural responses that lead to uncomfortable and unproductive feelings and behaviors.

The Jane Addams Collective started the MAST project when we noticed that our friends needed more direct, results-oriented and community based therapy, specifically in a anti-hierarchical context. We wanted to offer something that didn’t rely on an “expert to patient” paradigm and we wanted people to help us create it. After multiple iterations of these MAST sessions, we’ve not only brought along some of the participants to help facilitate the following sessions, but we’ve improved the model in the process.

When we conduct MAST sessions, our group generally structures the programs as two-hour sessions. First, we spend time talking about cognitive based therapy techniques and theory, introducing practical tools to use within the group, and ones to use alone. We do this in a combination of lectures (presenting material and handouts) and conversations with the participants. Sometimes we demonstrate the techniques.

After the first hour of discussion, we break into triads — our consistent groups of three (or four, if including a “Fourth Chair”) — to practice what we’ve learned. We take turns as the different roles, and rotate roles after 20 minutes (with a five minute debrief in between sessions). The goal for the supporters (counselors) is to learn how to help lead each narrator (person receiving counseling) to better understand the obstacles inhibiting their ability to change unwanted emotions or behaviors. The supporters try to help the narrator notice the scripts they use to tell others what goes on in their life, to notice what is “automatic” in their thinking, and to uncover some underlying beliefs that may be causing the unwanted emotions. We try to help each other unearth this underlying belief, understand it and start figuring out together what triggers its painful manifestations, abd what emotional reactions and behavior it causes, and how when and how long these feelings last. After this phase is complete, we spend the next few weeks trying to come up with a more healthy and useful alternative belief, which might have more positive manifestations; more healthy emotions and behaviors that spring from it. The goal in the end is not just to feel better, more capable and less stuck in our own lives, but also to build a stronger community in doing so.

Below is very simplified explanation of the three-part process of MAST. There are discrete goals for each step, after which the next should be started. There are some tools from cognitive psychology that can be used to aid a person throughout the process, while other tools are specific for one of the three stages.

Discovering the Generating Belief: Breaking the Script and the Spontaneous Moment

People have many generating beliefs (and some are interconnected) that can range from positive to dysfunctional/disruptive. Most people have emotions or behaviors that seem out of conscious control and are immune to conscious attempts to change. These negative emotions or behaviors are manifestations of an underlying belief (what we call a “generating belief”). The generating belief is almost always subconscious and the issue/s are a result of the generating belief’s reaction to external experiences or situations. Identifying a generating belief includes detailed understanding of the myriad aspects of it and its self-reinforcing thought patterns.

In this phase, the triad tries to get to the generating belief that supports the dysfunctional or unwanted emotions/behaviors. The supporters help the narrator with this by utilizing a number of cognitive tools and active listening to maneuver around the conscious “script” of the narrator. People use scripts to explain the world, ourselves and our feelings and this is not bad in and of itself. However, when we wish to make changes to our behaviors and emotional reactions, the script, or our automatic narrative, may hide the underlying generating belief that supports these unwanted emotions/behaviors.

While the script is a conscious construction and has the appearance of a linear and rational cause and effect, the generating belief is unconscious and often is supported not by rational constructs but by cognitive distortions. The goal of Phase 1 is to aid the narrator in having an unscripted experience (what we call a “spontaneous moment”) that will shed light on the underlying generating belief and connected cognitive distortions and automatic thinking that lead to the previously identified emotional and behavioral issue.

Mapping a Generating Belief & Creating an Alternate Generating Belief

Supporters in Phase 2 help the narrator map out the generating belief using a variety of cognitive tools (different but related to those used in Phase 1). The goal is to come to understand how the generating belief is reinforced by specific automatic thoughts and cognitive distortions, the triggers for this generating belief, the specific characteristics of this generating belief, and finally, the relationship that this generating belief, and its subsequent behavioral and emotional manifestations, has on the narrator’s life and goals.

After a generating belief has been fully mapped, the narrator starts work on creating an equally detailed alternate generating belief. An alternate generating belief is a consciously created conceptual pattern. It needs to be as detailed as the identified generating belief it seeks to replace. Creating an alternate generating belief should take into account how the person’s life would be different if this alternate belief was being acted on – examining the positive and negative consequences (all alternate belief systems have both positive and negative consequences). The alternate generating belief must be detailed and how it would interact with other personality traits should be considered. The alternate generating belief should have some reinforcing beliefs that the person already possesses. One can work with their triad or use specific cognitive tools themselves to create an alternate generating belief to replace a generative belief that leads the emotions and behaviors they’d like to change.

Substituting an Alternate Generating Belief for a Past Generating Belief

Once the generating belief leading to the negative emotions and behaviors has been identified, and a replacement has been considered, the last step of the MAST process is to substitute the past generating belief (PGB) with an alternate generating gelief (AGB). This involves a number of steps and some time to be completed. The process will include a slow replacement of PGB with the AGB with both being present for a while. The goal of this phase is to reinforce and habituate the AGB while simultaneously severing the unconscious reinforcements of the PGB. Just as there are a number of straightforward cognitive tools for identifying generating beliefs, and for creating alternate generating beliefs, there are tools used to substitute one belief with another consciously. One does this part of the process outside of the triad system using tools mastered within the triad and in the self-therapy sessions. During Phase 3, the supporters act as a feedback mechanism for the narrator to report their progress or setbacks. In this phase the supporters aim to provide empathetic support and encouragement to the narrator as they work through this self-guided process.

The three-phase process becomes easier (and faster) to self-implement once you have success in completing a full cycle. The same process of change can work no matter how ingrained, severe or difficult the emotional or behavioral problem is. While some problems are easier and are dealt with more quickly than others, the process remains the same. Participants in MAST need not learn new tools or techniques for each of their problems or be in “therapy” for years to perfect the process. The narrator, after having success once in a triad, can then work on other problems on their own using the tools they have mastered in the previous sessions.

During MAST, part of the group’s time together will be given to discussing and explaining new tools and concepts. For the rest of the time, the MAST group will break up into smaller groupings, called “triads” or teams. The triad is a technique employed by MAST to provide support and to allow individuals to learn cognitive tools. The goal of a triad is to allow a person to identify (in detail) a generating belief they have that is causing some emotional and/or behavioral problem/s in their life. If this is reached early in 6 to 8 weeks time, it is possible for a triad to go a step further and help a person define a new generating belief (or as it is called an alternate generating belief). The last phase consists of using tools on one’s own to substitute an alternative generating belief for an old, unwanted, generating belief.

The triad is a group made up of three participants going through the MAST multi-week project together. They work together to provide direct emotional support and to practice various techniques, learned throughout. They sit in a triangle with one chair being designated as the “narrator’s.” The narrator is a member of the triad who is trying to resolve an emotional/behavioral problem and identify the generating belief. The other two participants are “supporters”. The supporters’ task is to assist the narrator to identify generating beliefs by using MAST tools.

In each meeting of the triad, each participant of the triad spends 15–20 minutes as narrator, receiving support and direction from the other two members of the triad, who serve as their supporters. After the period, the participants switch chairs and the next narrator begins. The group switches a third time to the final narrator. As a result, each participant will spend 2⁄3 of their time providing support for others and 1⁄3 acting as the narrator and receiving support from the other two participants.

The work in each triad accelerates the learning process while at the same time providing concrete support for participants on various issues and mental obstacles in their lives. Also, three person structure may relieve some of the stress from the feeling that one individual is entirely responsible for support.

Finally, in addition to the benefits of learning by doing and learning from each other, this model was developed so as to avoid hierarchical client/therapist relationships, which rely on a one-way relationship between support and the supported. By rotating roles so that each individual spends more time in a supportive role, participants move away from simply receiving therapy while another is supposed to simply provide it. Here the responsibility is on the triad and one helps the others as much (or more) as one helps themselves.

Between each 15–20 minute session, before participants switch roles, it is important that time be given to analyze the session that just occurred. This is often done by asking the the narrator who just finished their session to reflect on it, discussing how tools were used, doing emotional check-ins, and examining potential friction: defensiveness or resistance to questions or responses from supporters. However, one should keep in mind that analysis is not used to discover fault, to blame, or to give advice. It is dedicated to pointing out successful tools and improving the support given to each other.

If groups are interested, they can choose to implement an addition aspect of a MAST triad called a “fourth chair.” Behind the narrator and outside of the physical triangle in which the triad sits, there can sit a “fourth chair”. Although a triad can work without it, the fourth chair is a facilitator who has already gone through MAST and has demonstrated prior understand of tools. The fourth chair is there to help the supporters if they run into difficulty, to facilitate post-session analysis, and to keep time.

This role will be discussed at more length in a subsequent section, but it should be noted that more recent MAST sessions have experimented with rotating the fourth chair role: triad members have taken turns at acting as the fourth chair just as they take turns at the narrator role or supporter role.

After the work in each triad is finished, all MAST participants regroup. After rejoining the larger group, participants discuss issues brought up during their analysis, general issues and insights, and specific difficulties or successes that can add to the MAST project. As a final note, it is important to remember that MAST is not only a moment of learning but also a time for invention and improvement. Each triad is an experiment and can be an opportunity to improve MAST as an ongoing project.

In the first few sessions, the members of the triad listen to and ask questions about each other’s “script.” Having been repeated many times before both privately to themselves and to others, the narrator’s script designates a recounting of events with unacknowledged cognitive distortions and biases. Everyone uses scripts and they are generally useful and healthy. A script usually consists of a narrative that makes sense to the listener and often is neutral or seemingly objective. Scripts also tend to repeat ideas, phrases and/or concepts. Often, scripts are said relatively effortlessly, with relaxed, though animated, body language that includes eye contact. There is nothing false or inherently wrong with scripts. All events or situations must pass through our existing cognitive frames or schema and the biases that come with them. It is simply a default behavior.

On the other hand, when recounting events within a script, the embedded cognitive distortions may prevent the narrator from seeing the generating beliefs and schema behind them. These distortions can negatively affect behaviors and reactions because one is unable to adequately reflect on the recent past, which will help them assess what actions to take in the future. The cognitive distortions that underpin our scripts are often influenced by the toxic institutions of western society; shaped by Christianity, anti-Blackness, colonialism, misogyny, and capitalist interests, and the coercive and violent underpinnings of these ideologies.

One of the goals of using the MAST tools is to prompt a spontaneous moment, a deeper, “unscripted” understanding of the unconscious belief system that generates the emotional and behavioral traits that the narrator wants to change. Trying to prompt or elicit a spontaneous moment is often referred to as “breaking the script”.

Breaking the script and spontaneous moments are closely linked and often occur either in sequence or in relative proximity to one another. Spontaneous moments also tend to revert to script very quickly after emerging. Some signs of a spontaneous moment during a triad may include: change in body language (less animated and/or less at ease); change in eye contact (for example looking away to the side or looking to the floor); a break in the tone and flow of words (for example there may be long pauses or the tone may drop significantly); emotional cues (for example tearing or skin flushes) and the use of unexpected metaphors (for example: “I feel I am being buried in beach sand”) and the unexpected use of emotional, loaded and often negative words (hopeless, rage, guilty, etc.). After doing a triad for a bit, it will become easier for a supporter to identify these often subtle changes. These moments are windows for the narrator to start identifying the underlying generating belief. They are also opportunities for supporters to apply a specific set of tools and techniques, ones which assist the narrator in articulating and examining here-to unremarked beliefs.

Spontaneous moments are sometimes difficult to elicit and “breaking the script” may take many tools and some time to get them to surface. Depending on who is narrating the event or situation, the script might be concise or simplistic, or saturated with lengthy contextualizing, lush details, and asides. Because scripts are so natural, supporters themselves can often get drawn into their details and become distracted from MAST tools. Also, if the individual speaking or recounting a script is exceptionally good at storytelling, the detail, the mood, and even the humor added to the script may distract from the task or even absorb a good portion of the time given to therapy with little actual work getting done.

MAST’s tools are aim at gathering the appropriate evidence on the situation, clarifying emotions and terms used by the one receiving support, or finally breaking the script. Because scripting may seem natural, a supporter’s behavior in a triad may not seem natural. As a result, it is important for supporters to understand some basic guidelines which help clarify the process of discovering generating beliefs.

It must first be said that building trust, supporting each other emotionally, and co-learning requires a serious and committed disposition. Therefore, participants are expected to attend all sessions to help develop some basic continuity, which, if lacking, hinders the process of building trust and camaraderie within the relatively short time participants will have together.

Giving advice during a triad is often counterproductive, since the goal is for the narrator to determine for themselves what is the generating belief and the best way forward in resolving their concerns/ problem. Advice can lead to a counterproductive give and take between the supporter and the narrator. It also inhibits the agency of the individual receiving support. Change is difficult and has a greater chance of success if the course of action is self-generated. Triads seek to keep a collegiate and egalitarian atmosphere, which could be endangered by advice-giving.

To set aside sympathy should not be confused with being unsympathetic. Sympathy can easily lead to misreading a person’s issue or generating belief by connecting it to your own feelings or experiences, personalizing the issue. Sympathy may lead you to believe you understand the situation when you really don’t. We should be supportive and encouraging of the narrator without being sympathetic.

The main role of the supporters is to intervene in the “script” with specific tools to move the process along. Triad sessions are intentionally kept short to motivate supporters to intervene and use the tools to speed the process up and not get distracted by the situation and the details. Thus, it’s important at times to interrupt. This does not mean that there should never be any moment of silence, or that supporters should not listen. A good moment to interrupt is when stories begin to repeat, or when relevant data become extraneous detail.

The supporters use the tools to keep the focus on the narrator’s emotional/behavioral concern and the underlying beliefs. The focus is not on the details of the situation. The supporter needs to know very little about the actual events in order to effectively use the MAST tools. Details of the situation can deflect from the generating belief and spontaneous moments.

If signs of a spontaneous moment occur (and different people may exhibit different combination of signs), remember it. It is not uncommon for the person to return to script (unconsciously) very quickly and you may need to prompt them back to that moment. You want to use tools focused on that event.

Friction, typically known as “resistance” in therapeutic parlance, can occur in sessions when the person in the narrator role seems to be working against their own goals or the supporters themselves. Often this behavior can provide rich material for further learning once it is identified, if there is a receptivity to discussion. If a supporter feels there is friction, they should point it out to the person. If there continues to be friction, the narrator should be allowed to do so and another track should be taken. Triads are not interrogations or confessions.

A supporter should not try to identify or describe the generating belief for another. It is also good practice not to try to guess or suggest what a generating belief might or might not be.

Don’t Assume You Understand the Meaning of an Emotional or Behavioral Word

Our language is quite imprecise at times and most people use simple or ambiguous terms when describing charged emotional states. The supporter should be using the tools to get clarity on these words or ideas and not assume they know what the person means. A person can say they get “angry” at their mother, but the supporter has no idea what actually means in terms of emotions and behavior. It is important for the supporter to help the narrator identify exactly what they are talking about and even if that is the right word/s for the phenomena.

MAST does not rely upon legal contracts, professional ethics boards and the false sense of security they seem to provide. Within the context of radical mental health, confidentiality could be seen as behaviors, sensitivities, and foresight about privacy, which develop trust between individual participants. In light of this, the larger group and each triad should discuss and work out what confidentiality means to them and how it is to be respected. Often what seems like common sense to one person may not be to the other, and this is no different when it comes to privacy and confidentiality.

A triad is not a confessional or interrogation, and each person involved is free to consider and behave in accordance with their desire for privacy. The responsibility to maintain confidentiality falls on individuals, each triad, and the MAST group, with equal measure. To help us consider how to be responsible to this issue and express desires and concerns, the whole group and each triad should discuss these questions:

What information stays within the triad; what is brought to the whole group for analysis when triads regroup; what information stays confidential outside of MAST?

When does a triad end, our self-therapy begin or other forms of socializing begin?

How do we let others know if we feel confidentiality is becoming an issue?

Where or in what context would discussing MAST be inappropriate?

This discussion should be had, and is a key part in creating the serious and supporting environment needed to help and rely on each other.

Based on previous sections, it appears that MAST is best when participants are not personally involved in the scenarios being described by narrators. Another aspect of forming a triad is being honest and aware that this ideal situation is rare. At times, we are more entwined in each other’s lives than what might be ideal for therapy. This comes to be of key concern when participants are members of the same community, and more so in smaller communities where it may be difficult for participants to be closely involved in each other’s lives.

When forming a triad, members should feel that they are not forced to be in triads with people with whom they feel they have existing problems, which would hinder sessions altogether, or which may risk privacy, safety or other obligations. As a group, it is necessary that participants be willing to accept that they may not be the ideal candidate for a given triad. In accordance with this awareness, a person’s request not to be in a particular triad is not necessarily an insult to others but instead a sign of respect for the work and to each participant’s benefit. In many cases, it would be better to have no triad than one that may result in more harm than good to those involved. The group should discuss this together before forming triads. Or, if need be and if one is available, it could be good to discuss this with a facilitator or “fourth chair.”

Starting a session can be difficult. It is up to two supporters to ask questions if the person receiving support does not have an exact problem. Some ways to start are to ask if a person has a specific recurring experience or feeling on which they want to work on. These problems can be either major or minor. The problem one begins with does not have to be a major one because initial problems are just starting points to get to negative generating beliefs and only a first step in transforming them.

Beginning one’s session can be a challenge even after the first week. Often people forget past sessions or incorrectly believe that everything has been resolved. It is unlikely that a negative generating belief or the kinds of problems it creates will disappear after one 15 minute conversation. Supporters can remind the person they are assisting of prior issues or themes brought up in past sessions, or ask about how problems from past sessions changed or evolved. Also, discussing homework and self-therapy tools worked with between each session can be a great way to start and often improves the dynamic of each session.

The triad model is not a perfected form but an ongoing project, which can and should be adapted for the context in which it is being applied. As mentioned before, MAST and the triad model are experiments, and improvements are necessary and welcomed. MAST is not a dogma but itself a tool in which the triad model makes up one part. We hope that each MAST group takes the lead in their pursuit of mental health and struggle. Each group is capable of discovering new tools and methodologies for them and for others. This requires not only that we learn but that we trust our intuition and creativity.

During each session of MAST, the narrator will be providing a “script.” The goal of each MAST session is to work with the script provided by the narrator. The script is the language the narrator uses to describe their emotional and mental life. This script will be the primary or initial material with which the triad will work. The belief(s) that underpin the script are what will be modified and changed by MAST. The goal of MAST is to change the belief(s), and therefore the script, in order change the behavior and emotions articulated and over-determined by the script. In the theoretical model MAST employs, the script is divided into three interrelated levels. They most often appear in this order: automatic or situational thoughts; intermediate, thematic, or conditional thoughts and beliefs; and finally, generating beliefs.

Generating beliefs are defined as fundamental, inflexible, absolute, and generalized beliefs that people hold about themselves, others, the world, and/or the future, which seem to generate and dictate other thoughts. When a generating belief is inaccurate, unhelpful, and/or judgmental, it will have a profound effect on a person’s sense of self, sense of efficacy, and promotes susceptibility to harmful behaviors. Generating beliefs typically spring from “I am” statements (“I am undesirable,” “I am incompetent,” “I am trapped”). The greatest amount of change, which can be maintained over time, results when people identify unhelpful generating beliefs and work with their supporters, using cognitive therapy strategies, to develop and embrace a workable and beneficial replacement belief system.

Generating beliefs are much more difficult to elicit and modify in cognitive therapy sessions than the situational or the automatic thoughts they produce. Generating beliefs usually develop from messages received, over time, during a person’s formative years, oftentimes during childhood but sometimes during times of substantial stress during adulthood. Some people receive harmful messages from their peers when they are teased or bullied. Some people who had adaptive belief systems develop during childhood and adolescence, went on to experience horrific events as an adult that had a profound impact on their generating beliefs. Society, media and school can also create unwanted generating beliefs. Identification of the pathway by which generating beliefs develop can provide multiple points for consideration and intervention.

Understanding how generating beliefs are understood in cognitive theory will allow supporters to understand and articulate to each other how to work with the tools for the desired effects from modifying generating beliefs. Generating beliefs are embedded in a larger construct, schema, or frame. Frames or schema are persistent arrangements of past notions and experiences that are used to organize new information in a meaningful way, and therefore affect how new notions and experiences are perceived and understood. In other words, schema or frames not only influence what we believe, but also how we process the information that we encounter in our daily lives.

Generating beliefs are beliefs that illustrate or represent a person’s frame or schema. When a schema and its corresponding generating belief(s) are activated, people experience life in a biased manner, such that they tend to assign importance to, label, and remember certain notions and ideas that better match their schema, and they overlook information that is inconsistent with the generating belief. Thus, there is a mutual relation between experiential biases caused by one’s frames and generating beliefs, such that frames strengthen a person’s generating beliefs, and that generating beliefs strengthen information processing biases. schema and their corresponding generating beliefs give rise to both automatic thoughts, and intermediate beliefs.

Intermediate thoughts, which are conditional rules, attitudes, and assumptions, often unspoken, that plays a large role in the manner in which people live their lives and respond to life’s difficulties. In many instances, they are worded, as “if-then” conditional statements that prescribe certain rules that must be met in order for the person to protect him- or herself from a painful generating belief. For example, a person with an “I’m a failure” generating belief might live by the rule, “If I get all A’s, then I’m successful,” which is viewed as a positive intermediate belief because it specifies a path toward a positive outcome. However, that same person might also live by a negative intermediate belief. Intermediate beliefs that do not use conditional language are often expressed as emotionally charged attitudes or assumptions about the way the world works. The problem with these rules and assumptions is that they are rigid and inflexible, usually prescribing impossible standards to which one should live her or her life. Failing to account for life’s unexpected events and challenges, invariably affects one’s ability to achieve these standards. As with generating beliefs, they exacerbate experiential biases that reinforce unhelpful generating beliefs, and conversely, experiential biases strengthen the rigidity of these rules and assumptions.

It is not surprising, then, that schema and their associated generating beliefs, intermediate beliefs, and information processing biases create a context for certain automatic thoughts to arise under particular circumstances. People in similar situations can report very different automatic thoughts, and the explanation for those different thought patterns is that these people are characterized by different sets of generating beliefs and intermediate beliefs. Information processing biases only serve to further increase the likelihood that a person will experience negative automatic thoughts in stressful or otherwise challenging situations. When these thoughts are activated, they feed back into those biases.

People do not have just one frame or scheme nor do they have just one set of generating beliefs. Instead people tend to have several systems of schema, generating beliefs, intermediate beliefs, automatic thoughts, and biases that are assimilated into a larger mode. Some modes influence how we deal with life necessities such subsistence and stability. Others influence our ability to build satisfying relationships. Some modes influence daily or specific activities such as reading, writing and driving. But unhelpful belief systems have the potential to be harmful in all different parts of ones life.

Working on generating beliefs plays a large part in modifying belief systems so as to add flexibility and autonomy to the rules and assumptions by which a person lives their lives. In turn, it is hoped that such flexibility will decrease unhelpful or harmful thoughts from becoming automatic in stressful or challenging situations. Adding flexibility to a belief system might decrease the weight that unhelpful schema carry when people function in various modes and decreases the extremity of experiential biases.

Although some people can often identify a generating belief very quickly, many need some time before they can identify it and are ready to work on it. Some people have difficulty identifying cognition that is related to averse emotions, so they require practice with the more-easily-accessible automatic thoughts before they have a sense of their underlying generating beliefs. Others find the articulation of their generating beliefs to be overly threatening and painful, and working with situational or automatic thoughts first allows them to develop a sense of comfort before they begin to focus on more intermediate or fundamental beliefs.
