---
title: "Analysis: Antifa Black Bloc, Lewiston Maine"
author: "Green Mountain Anarchist Collective, Lady"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lady-green-mountain-anarchist-collective-analysis-antifa-black-bloc-lewiston-maine-2003"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Internal Movement Reportback"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lady-green-mountain-anarchist-collective-analysis-antifa-black-bloc-lewiston-maine-2003.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lady-green-mountain-anarchist-collective-analysis-antifa-black-bloc-lewiston-maine-2003.epub"
    hosted: false
---

WCC (World Church of the Creator), who surprisingly worked with NA (National Alliance) on this one, picked a good town to stir up racism in. It is no surprise that the WCC is trying to channel attitudes toward the recent influx of Somali residents into racist ideology. When city officials (i.e. Mayor Raymond) make blatantly racist statements against the Somali people, and the Lewiston police department participates in their own hate crimes against local Somalis, it makes it easier for people in the community to think that being racist is normal and the answer to the city’s problems. There were enough locals riding the fence that came out to the National Guard Armory (yeah, the State protects Nazis) on Saturday to make us feel that there was much dialogue needed that day and beyond. Some of the questions raised by locals, who came to see if racist ideology was the answer to the economic problems of Lewiston, included: “Why can’t I get a business loan? A Somali can just move here and get one, easy,” “I need more food stamp money. Why do they get our food stamp money?,” and “We need housing. We were here first. Why do they get places to live?” These are all relevant and pressing questions to be asked within the community, wrongly assumed and misdirected of course, but nonetheless, onto something. And you can imagine what the dialogue consisted of-the conclusion being, “So, what you’re saying is you’re really pissed at the government.” The point is, the people who showed up on Saturday asking these questions really didn’t want to walk away with racism being the answer to their economic despairs. Racism is being fed to these folks as an answer, like it is in other cities facing similar issues. It felt good to able to dialogue with locals who came out on Saturday, and begin erasing the racist connection being made by fascist groups such as the WCC, NA, and the State, to immigration and poverty within the US. The ability to do this is always hindered when you have a contingent of people who are seen as outsiders (out-of-towners), and militants nonetheless, coming to expel racist groups from a city they don’t live in. All in all, we were productive. We were expecting the rookie (in regards to having previously dealt with a specifically fascist vs. Antifa rally) pig force of Lewiston to be able to utilize their special training for our arrival, and the following precautions were to be employed by them: the confiscation of flag or sign poles, backpacks, cameras that weren’t given previous press clearance (because you know how terrorists like to hide bombs in cameras?!), and random searches. No protesters were permitted to be in radius of the National Guard Armory, and were going to be directed to two ‘park and rides’ half a mile down another street. Roads were going to be blocked off, and ID’s checked upon rerouting traffic to the park and rides. The following is what (we believe) we did successfully on Saturday January 11 th : Deciding to use Black Bloc tactics was an advantage on our part. With this situation at hand, the contingent of Antifa decided to employ Black Bloc tactics (it is specifically important here that we decided to march in formation, and elected a tactical facilitation core). We would like to suggest that those interested in carrying out Bloc tactics read the pamphlet ‘A Communiqué on Tactics.’ By wearing black, masking up, and marching in a tight rectangular formation with banners on all sides, we looked intimidating to the pigs. The first road block consisted of three cop cars and six or so pigs. All but one stood there staring, while the “ranking officer” approached us. The banner was lifted right over his head, and wouldn’t you know-he found himself right in the middle of the Bloc. Piece of cake. (Here, this worked well. In another situation, where the police are our primary combatants, we should never allow an enemy in our midst except to physically deal with them.) The next barricade consisted of two city dump …
