---
title: "Breaking down concentrations of power"
author: "Ray Cunningham"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ray-cunningham-breaking-down-concentrations-of-power"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The State, Democracy and Anarchism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ray-cunningham-breaking-down-concentrations-of-power.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ray-cunningham-breaking-down-concentrations-of-power.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What is the State?        In whose interests?        Democracy?        By any means necessary?        What kind of freedom? A thing that sets anarchists apart from all the other varieties of socialists is our opposition to the state. Others believe that the state can be entered into accommodations with, or even that the state can sometimes be a positive force. Anarchists believe that the influence of the state is always ultimately destructive and that it is, by its nature, a barrier to the advance of human freedom. When we speak of the state, we do not mean the particular government that is in power at the moment. The state is a centralised hierarchic form of organisation, where decisions are made by a (sometimes elected) few, and everyone else is obliged to obey. The police, the prison system and the army are all on hand to make sure that we do obey. There are other organisations which mirror this top-down structure, but the state stands apart in its claim to be the ultimate authority, and in its readiness to use force to back up that claim. The arguments about which came first, capitalism or the state, are too long and involved (not to mention boring and irrelevant) to get into here, suffice to say that we see the two as being mutually supporting. Political parties need funding from business to get into power, as well as support from the media, owned in turn by rich businessmen. Even after the election governments need some degree of support from business to survive. For example, when a Labour government, by no means revolutionary, was elected in Britain in the 1974, there was a massive outflow of capital from the country, which weakened that government considerably. In return, government supports the rich, by lowering taxes on the wealthy and on business profits (which means taxing us more) and passing anti-union legislation, so that their profits increase while our wages and working conditions lag behind. Some governments are even worse. The US government, in particular, has a long and dishonourable history of installing puppet regimes who are handsomely rewarded for letting US companies drain their countries dry of all natural resources, while (sometimes literally) killing off any opposition which arises. And, more recently, there was the Gulf War, one lot of imperialist powers fighting another belligerent power, all in the name of ..lower oil prices. There isn’t a one-to-one relationship between business and the state, of course. Sometimes businessmen just get too greedy, or the public get too angry about the cosy relationship that exists between politicians and businessmen, so an example is made of someone, to ‘prove’ that there isn’t one law for the rich and another for the rest of us. Meanwhile the Larry Goodmans and his pals carry on ripping us off with the government’s approval. Very occasionally the government will pass laws which appear to run counter to the interests of the rich, the most commonly cited example being the establishment of the social welfare system, which cost money that could otherwise have been used to ‘support business’. But the welfare system wasn’t created as an act of generosity, or as the first instalment in repaying us what we are owed. It was a response to rising militancy and higher expectations in the working class. It was a bribe to forestall bigger demands, they gave us a slice of the cake to stop us from taking it all. And even that is being taken away — the generation that was promised care from the cradle to the grave is the first to be hit by falling pensions and health care cuts. The justification for this, of course, is that it is “democratic”. We get a chance to vote every four years, and so we are not really being ruled over, our ‘representatives’ are only putting into effect the “will of the people”. But what sort of democracy is this? How much influence do we really have over the decisions taken by the government? Virtually none. When it comes time to put our marks on …
