---
title: "First Protocols of Queer Goetia"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-first-protocols-of-queer-goetia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Contagion Press https://contagionpress.com/ Contagion Press"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-first-protocols-of-queer-goetia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-first-protocols-of-queer-goetia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

These dead are hungry . Fuck, Dance, run, kiss, steal, eat decadently, sing, destroy, create. The energy of life, ecstatic life, draws them close, nourishes. Let your kissing, dancing, fucking, creating, destroying move you to trance. Give them space and adorn it lavishly. Speak to them there, where they are comfortable and at home. The dead, and especially the queer dead, are unorganized, chaotic. Don’t expect organization. Instead find nodes, affines, contacts among them. They’ll coordinate among themselves. Learn their names, all their names, the secret ones too. All the better to call them by. Research obsessively, research frantically, research ecstatically. Study their codes, commit yourself to the argot, the signs, open yourself up to veiled messages. Pay attention to subtle omens — on the radio, in thrift stores, bookstores, passing conversations — they work through synchronicity. There is no such thing as a coincidence. Pay especial attention to outcasts, ranters, mad-ones, drunks. Experiment with divinatory modes: practice bibliomancy, pay attention to birds, scry in wine, quiet your mind. Alter your state of consciousness with drugs, with fasting, with dance, with chant. Hold vigils, visit memorials, pour libations, light candles. Celebrate birthdays, deathdays, celebrate accomplishments, celebrate festivals. Sketch a map of sacred places, an enchanted geography. Walk the old haunts: bars and parks and cruising spots. Therein pick up their trace. Some will travel in packs and as houses, others are solitary. Learn how to engage with them together and alone. Among them there will be spirits more or less elevated, more or less wise, more or less chained by their traumas. Seek the advice of the wise ones, and do not be drowned in the pain and fear of the others. You may feel yourself to be dying, you may find yourself rapt in panic and anxiety. This is a cost of the work. Learn to separate what is yours and what isn’t. Part of the work will be to assist those who need healing. To show them how to heal themselves. Healing may be ecstatic too. Cultivate empathy, learn how to regulate it. Empathy may register as desire, sickness, terror, joy. Lean into your anxieties and manias, into your highs and lows. Often you’ll find the spirits on the other end. Balance is necessary. As you surround yourself with the dead, invite in life in equal parts. Cleanse yourself. The dead are intrinsically miasmic. Cleanse with flowers, baths, perfumes. Cleanse the doors of perception. Learn to open and close doors, build and burn bridges. Sing, especially if you never do, sing for them and them alone. Cultivate certain qualities — ecstatic, cathartic, flamboyant, chthonic — in all things. Practice automatic writing, possessory trance, and other methods of channeling. Journey to the underworld and find your way out. Take breaks, take space, take time, take liberties. The freaks come out at night. Everything dances. Experiment working in groups, amplifying energy and clarity. Another might pick up on something you miss. Build longterm relationships, make oaths, set boundaries. Write love letters to the dead. Look out for their response. Monitor your dreams, record them when you wake. Write everything down, especially if it seems unrelated at first. Make excessive offerings, wine and mixed drinks, cigarettes, drugs, water, candy, coffee, light. What the dead loved in life they’ll welcome beyond. Dress up to meet them as you would for a date. Bring them flowers. Wear them in your hair to remind yourself of your future underground. Don’t expect the dead to keep their appointments. Some are awkwardly early, others fashionably late. Show up on time regardless. Go out, and bring them with. Stay in and have them over. Allow yourself to wander, in cities and in the wild. Let the dead drift alongside. Wear costumes, wear drag, wear masks, Let them fill the void behind all these. Practice creating masks for different situations. Beauty, intention, and g…
