---
title: "25 Years on the Move"
author: "MOVE"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/move-25-years-on-the-move"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://archive.org/details/on_the_move_25_1996/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "move-25-years-on-the-move.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/move-25-years-on-the-move.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     JOHN AFRICA’S ORGANIZATION      Community Involvement      Public Appearances and Media Coverage      Frank Rizzo and The Police      Police Brutality      MOVE Baby Murdered      Beating The Courts      THE SET-UP      May 20, 1977 Demonstration      Standoff      Murder trial      30 To 100 Year Sentences      Outwitting The Feds      Seeking Justice      Mumia Abu-Jamal — Part 1      Osage Avenue      The City turns A Deaf Ear      May 13, 1985 Bombing and Fire      Murder in the Alley      Blaming The Victim      Prisons      Coming Home      Old Faces in New Places      Mumia Abu-Jamal — Part 2      P.C.R.A. Appeals      Staying On The MOVE      Modern justice in the Birthplace of the Constitution      MOVE: Belief & Practice        Our Religion — life        NATURAL LAW        Self defense        Right and wrong        The System        MOVE’s Work        Being a Revolutionary        PERSECUTION        The Duration of the Struggle        LEADERS        Living As A Revolutionary Family        Our Children        Appearance        Raw Food and Distortion        Caring for Life        The Name MOVE The MOVE Organization surfaced in Philadelphia during the early 1970s. Characterized by dreadlock hair, the adopted surname “Africa,” a principled unity, and an uncompromising commitment to their belief, members practiced the teachings of MOVE founder JOHN AFRICA. MOVE’S WORK IS TO STOP INDUSTRY FROM POISONING THE AIR, THE WATER, THE SOIL, AND TO PUT AN END TO THE ENSLAVEMENT OF LIFE — PEOPLE, ANIMALS, ANY FORM OF LIFE. THE PURPOSE OF JOHN AFRICA’S REVOLUTION IS TO SHOW PEOPLE HOW CORRUPT, ROTTEN, CRIMINALITY ENSLAVING THIS SYSTEM IS. SHOW PEOPLE THROUGH JOHN AFRICA’S TEACHING, THE TRUTH, THAT THIS SYSTEM IS THE CAUSE OP ALL THEIR PROBLEMS (ALCOHOLISM, DRUG ADDICTION, UNEMPLOYMENT, WIFE ABUSE, CHILD PORNOGRAPHY, EVERY PROBLEM IN THE WORLD) AND TO SET THE EXAMPLE OF REVOLUTION FOR PEOPLE TO FOLLOW WHEN THEY REALIZE HOW THEY’VE BEEN OPPRESSED, REPRESSED, DUPED, TRICKED BY THIS SYSTEM, THIS GOVERNMENT AND SEE THE NEED TO RID THEMSELVES OF THIS CANCEROUS SYSTEM AS MOVE DOES. MOVE “ ...all experience hath shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future security.” United States Declaration of Independence During the early 1970’s MOVE was based in the Powrlion Village section of West Philadelphia. Members valued the personal discipline and physical strength derived from hard manual labor, and maintained a hefty work schedule of daily activities such as exercising, scrubbing floors, running dogs, chopping fire wood, shoveling snow, sweeping the street, etc. Demonstrating their reverence for all forms of life. MOVE looked after neighbors’ pets, helped homeless people find places to live, assisted the elderly with home repairs, intervened in violence between local gangs and college fraternities, and helped incarcerated offenders meet parole requirements through a rehabilitation program. After adopting MOVE’S way of natural living, many individuals overcame past problems of drug addiction, physical disabilities, infertility and alcoholism. MOVE purchased a large Victorian house at 309 North 33 rd Street, which became then headquarters. One of MOVES fundraising activities was a very popular car wash at this location. At regular study sessions for people interested in the teachings of JOHN AFRICA, MOVE welcomed dissenting views as an opportunity to showcase their belief and sharpen their oratorical skills, which they knew would be tested in their revolutionary struggle. “IT IS THE POSITION OF MOVE TO CONFRONT ANY SPEAKER, SO-CALLED INFORMED PERSONALITIES, ALLEGED LEADERS WHO SAY THEY …
