---
title: "Anarchist Charges and the Politics of Hawaiian Indigeneity and Sovereignty"
author: "J. Kēhaulani Kauanui"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/j-kehaulani-kauanui-anarchist-charges-and-the-politics-of-hawaiian-indigeneity-and-sovereignty"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://kamehamehapublishing.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/38/2020/09/Hulili_Vol11_10.pdf"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "j-kehaulani-kauanui-anarchist-charges-and-the-politics-of-hawaiian-indigeneity-and-sovereignty.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/j-kehaulani-kauanui-anarchist-charges-and-the-politics-of-hawaiian-indigeneity-and-sovereignty.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In 2009, I delivered a talk at the Kamakakūokalani Center for Hawaiian Studies for an event critically reflecting on the fiftieth year of statehood for Hawai‘i. My talk focused on the distinctions between de-occupation, decolonization, and indigenous self-determination. I challenged the notion that occupation and colonialism are mutually exclusive, as is often asserted by Hawaiian Kingdom nationalists. And, in turn, I proposed that we take up the analytic of settler colonialism, while also drawing on normative frameworks of international law as a tactic to challenge US Empire, and stressed the spiritual and material importance of decolonial resistance. I noted my affiliation with the nationalist movement, dating back to 1990, as a diasporic Hawaiian woman. A video of my talk made its way to YouTube, and in the comments section, David Carr posted critical comments focused on nationalism and anarchism. From what I know about Carr, he is an educator as well as the curator of the Hawaiʻi 70s–80s Punk Museum online. Here is an excerpt of his feedback: Post-modernists pass for radical these days. Indigeneity, tracing a geneology [sic] to precontact peoples is a racial claim to sovereignty. That’s old fashioned 19th century politics. Thanks Heidegger and Foucault for helping to orchestrate this retreat from class. Academia is giving birth to these neo-anarchist bourgeois geniuses who never ever mention class, just as JKK did not for this entire speech. JKK represents the far right conservative wing of fake anarchism for our time. Sorry JKK, but anarchists don’t promote ethnic nationalism, and no amount of confused pretzel logic can dress up your ideology as anti-nationalist. Why not just come clean and admit you are a liberal academic with a taste for postmodernism because it allows you to imagine yourself as a radical without having to actually engage in class war against capital? Although I never identified myself as an anarchist in the talk, nor did my work on anarchism come up on the panel, I nonetheless want to respond to the charges Carr levied online since they offer an opportunity to distinguish the diversity of anarchist practices, clarify common misunderstandings about Hawaiian nationalism often held by non-Kanaka, and offer some initial thoughts on bringing together an indigenous sovereignty politic in relation to anarchist philosophy and activism. Several comrades and colleagues who have read Carr’s comments asked why I would even take time to respond to them. However, when one distills Carr’s critique, he raises a set of questions that I have been asked by political radicals I respect, who have asked me in private how I reconcile my Hawaiian nationalist commitments with an anarchist political orientation. Moreover, Carr unfortunately is not an outlier among radical leftists as he represents a revolutionary class-struggle anarchist position. Here I aim to grapple with anarchist political frameworks vis-à-vis assertions of Hawaiian indigeneity and sovereignty. Bringing together an indigenous sovereignty politic in relation to anarchist philosophy and praxis can be challenging in light of a statist kingdom nationalist movement on the one hand, and a US statedriven containment of Hawaiian claims within federal policy on Indian tribes on the other. This fraught terrain begs for a decolonial anarchist approach that challenges settler colonialism while also engaging international law as a tactic to challenge US occupation. By turning to the non-statist/non-Western form of indigenous Hawaiian “sovereignty,” known as ea, for guiding cultural principles toward ethical relationships, I argue that anarchism need not be at odds with lāhui (Hawaiian peoplehood, often glossed as nation). Thus, this short essay is my initial attempt to examine ways the two may come together. Hence, in tending to Carr’s “anarchist charges” against me (his accusations), I offer my own understanding of “anarchist charges” (responsibilities) in the context …
