---
title: "First Steps Under Fascism"
author: "Revoluciana, Luciana Inara"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/revoluciana-first-steps-under-fascism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 19 Feb 2025 from revoluciana.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "revoluciana-first-steps-under-fascism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/revoluciana-first-steps-under-fascism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Recognize Responsibility        Acceptance and Emotional Regulation        Education vs Doom Scrolling        Planning and Action It’s here and you’re scared and you don’t know what to think and it feels all so completely surreal. You go to work, and you whisper to work friends about how absurd it is, but you get your work done. Some of your colleagues are oblivious. Some might even be excited. You’re terrified. You go shopping and it all feels so... how can people just be shopping? How can I just be shopping? Why isn’t anyone yelling or screaming or crying and why doesn’t someone do something . You remember what I said before: You’re someone. Do something. But you still don’t know what to do. And you’re scared. It’s okay. It’s not okay. But it’s okay to feel this way, which is to say, it’s expected. Your brain is scrolling on a loop: Fight Flight Freeze Fawn But for whatever reason, your brain can’t stick to one. Which means you’re stuck in Freeze. You feel like a deer in headlights. You know you need to do something but you don’t know what. Good. If you’ve ever taken CPR training, you likely remember being told that you can’t just shout, “Someone call 911!” Instead you must point at someone, get their attention, and you say, “You! Call 911!” If you shout for someone to call 911, everyone will look around, waiting for someone to do it, wasting precious time, and sometimes no one calls at all until it’s too late. But if you direct someone to do it, they now have a sense of responsibility. And now you see the emergency we’re all facing. You’re reminding yourself that you are someone. You recognize that responsibility, and you can no longer say you didn’t know. It’s on you. It’s on you specifically to do something . You can’t look around anymore. You must look within. You must. You are responsible for what you do next. You can’t help anyone if you’re falling apart. Remember to breathe. Take care of your friends and family. Check in on them. Your marginalized friends are doing far worse. Check in on them. Offer more than words. Offer material support. People can’t regulate their emotional needs properly when their material needs are not met. Accept material support. If you are being offered support, accept it. Don’t be stoic. Don’t be an island. Be connected. This is mutual aid. Be honest with yourself about what’s happening. Refuse to believe when society tries to gaslight you. Refuse to believe when individuals gaslight you. Accept that you are not paranoid, you are having an authentic and rational response to what is happening and that anyone pretending this isn’t what it is, is either lying to themselves in an attempt to feel better, completely oblivious, or they are lying to you because their interests are in opposition to yours. Lying to yourself won’t make you feel better, it will only cause more cognitive dissonance and increase your anxiety. Instead, accept what has happened and the place we have arrived. Accept what you are seeing with your own eyes. Lately, the more you read, the more terrified you get. You see the overwhelming amount of terrible things unfolding and you feel powerless to stop them. This is by design. Why would there be so many executive orders all at once? Why are they all so absurd? Why does it feel like they bear no logic? There are two reasons. Sure, they want to achieve the goals laid out in their actions. But there’s something more: it’s a psychological trick. This is something people experienced in intelligence operations are very familiar with. The overwhelming speed, the sheer amount of actions, the absurdity, the lack of logic. It’s designed to overwhelm you so that you feel helpless: There are too many to read or learn about News can’t make them all front page You spend more time concerning yourself with the illogical language than the impact or their goals You spend more time panicking than anything else You’re getting exhausted You’re so overwhelmed, you don’t do anything else You f…
