---
title: "Feminism and Sexism in the Anarchist Movement"
author: "Anonymous, Klito, Alphabet Threat, Dan Spalding, Angela Beallor, Class War Federation, Chris Crass, Pendleton Vandiver, Krysti Guest, Harsha Walia, Black Rose Anarcho-Feminists, Chicago Anarcho-Feminists, Tamara K. Nopper, Molly Tov, Kirsten Anderberg, No Pretence"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-feminism-and-sexism-in-the-anarchist-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Collection of Essays"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-feminism-and-sexism-in-the-anarchist-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-feminism-and-sexism-in-the-anarchist-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Towards an Introduction: Why Anarcha-Feminism?        MOVEMENT or why we aren’t one        CLASS or is anybody out there?        RESISTANCE or are we futile?        IDEAS INTO REALITY and what’s in between?      A Man’s Heaven is a Woman’s Hell      A Message to “Anarchist” Men, and then some      Activist Scenes are No Safe Space for Women: On Abuse of Activist Women by Activist Men      Anarcho-Feminism: Two Statements        Who we are: An Anarcho-Feminist Manifesto        Blood Of The Flower: An Anarchist-Feminist Statement        A Note On The Text      ‘Are You a Manarchist?’ Questionnaire        General Questions:        Activism Questions :        Sexual/Romantic Relationships and Issues :        Friendship Questions :        Domestic/Household Questions :        Children & Childcare :        Multi-Category Questions:      Challenging Patriarchy in Political Organising        Examples of sexism in political organizing:        Some Suggestions      Feminism and Anarchism: Towards a Politics of Engagement        A Sketch of Feminist Political Theory        A Sketch of Anarchist Political Principles        Some General Thoughts on Prevalent Forms of Anarchism        The “Visions of Freedom” Conference        Excluding Visions of Freedom        Anarchism’s Political Disengagement      Feminism: A Male Anarchist’s Perspective      Going To Places That Scare Me: Personal Reflections On Challenging Male Supremacy        Part I: “How can I be sexist? I’m an anarchist!”        Part II: “What historical class am I in?”        Part III: “this struggle is my struggle”        Post script: “we must walk to make the struggle real”        Further Reading      Listen Anarchist! Sexism in the Movement        Meetings        Childcare        Sexual Oppression        Sexual Harassment        Rape and Sexual Abuse        Challenges for the Future        Resources and Suggested Reading      Women and Revolutionary Politics, or... Make Your Own Tea: Women’s Realm and other Recipes and Patterns        DAZED AND CONFUSED        WHAT DID YOU DO IN THE WAR, MUM?        WOMEN: THEY ALL LOOK THE SAME TO ME        THE ENEMY WITHIN        YOU’LL ALWAYS FIND ME IN THE KITCHEN AT PARTIES        GET YOUR TITS OUT FOR THE LASSES        WILL THIS MOVEMENT MOVE ME?      Sexism in the Anarchist Movement        Challenging Ideas and Behaviors        Political Study        Encouraging Women        Anarchist Organizational Structures        Taking up Womens’Struggle        Forward Always, Backwards Never      Shut the Fuck Up or, How to act better in meetings        Introduction        Who cares about meetings?        It’s not just how often you talk, but how and when        But I can’t be sexist — I’m a hippie        So shut the fuck up already        What else can we do?        The solution        But I can’t let a girl do this -I mean, I’m the only one who knows how        Epilogue      Smash Patriarchy!: Leaflet from Thessaloniki        ANTI-SEXIST MANIFESTO        SMASH PATRIARCHY      There is only so much Sexism an Anarchist can take      What it is to be a Girl in an Anarchist Boys Club      What’s New under the Black Flag?: Some Thoughts on Anti-Sexism in the Libertarian Movement        A little history        Invisible women        Patriarchy and capitalism        Gender? Don’t know...        Sexuality is political      You want to know why I don’t go to your fucking meetings anymore?! Isn’t anarchism essentially feminist, with its central aim of abolishing hierarchy and creating equality? While theoretically it should be, in reality anarchist organisations and people claiming to be anarchists consistently ignore (or worse, out right deny the existence of) gender oppression. The problem of gender is rarely an integral part of anti-capitalist and anti-racist discourse and struggle. A look at history shows us that the anarchist movement has not considered feminism one of its major concerns. Although Bakunin, for example, advocated complete equali…
