---
title: "Anarchism is about individuals"
author: "Donald Rooum"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/donald-rooum-anarchism-is-about-individuals"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From the 1986 centenary issue of Freedom, pp. 56–57 Retrieved on 2024-06-21 from https://files.libcom.org/files/freedom-centenary.pdf"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "donald-rooum-anarchism-is-about-individuals.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/donald-rooum-anarchism-is-about-individuals.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The purpose of human society There is no such thing as human society. A lot of muddled thinking rests on the error that because ‘society’ is a useful noun, it must refer to a thing. It is one of those nouns like ‘journey’ and ‘tennis’, which refers not to a thing but to a relationship between things. The statement ‘human society exists’ is simply a less cumbersome way of saying ‘human individuals relate to each other in certain complicated ways’. The question, ‘what is the purpose of human society?’ means the same as, ‘why do human individuals associate in the way they do?’. Human craving for society is irrational. The old social contract philosophers listed what they took to be the advantages of society, and wrote as if individuals deliberately adopted society for the sake of these advantages, as if society in general were an invention, like a trade union or a cycling club. We know from experience it is not like that at all. Human individuals who go for long without company experience a particular emotional distress called loneliness. Frustrated in more complex social needs they feel such distresses as humiliation and lack of job-satisfaction. Human eagerness for society is no more rational than the eagerness of a sheep to be in a flock, although it is less simple. Human society did not start for any discernible purpose. The emotional depth of the human need for society suggests that it is genetically inherited, and probably provides some selective advantage to individuals, or provided selective advantage to an ancestor. There is nothing planned about genetic inheritance. Biologists sometimes make statements like ‘the giraffe evolved a long neck so that it could browse higher up the trees’, but they are not intended to be taken literally. There is no such animal as the giraffe; there are only individual giraffes. And there is no ‘so that’ about evolution; what happened in the case of giraffe’s necks, according to the natural selection theory, is that those individuals which just happened to have longer necks just happened to be alive at a time when the available food just happened to be high, and so just happened to survive and breed as their relatives starved. The idea is gaining ground that natural selection alone cannot account for the whole of evolutionary change, but the other mechanisms proposed are equally unplanned. Indiscernible extramundane purpose cannot be excluded. Perhaps the Creator had human society or giraffe’s necks in mind when the laws of physics were created at the beginning of time. For all we can discern, however, human society began by accident. Opinions about the purpose of human society abound, but they are not factual opinions. They are ethical opinions. They cannot be confirmed or refuted by reference to facts, and they do not even need to be internally consistent. They can be argued, but for argument to succeed there must probably be a measure of assent to start with. Anarchism is founded on the opinion that the purpose of human society is to extend the range of individual choices. It seems indisputable that human society does in fact extend the range of individual choices. To take a simple example: an isolated individual cannot choose to shift a weight that takes two people to shift it; whereas an individual in society can make that choice, if only there is another individual who wants the same weight shifted. By being in society, each individual can use the strength of the other. This is called co-operation. Not all human relationships, however, are co-operative. Some are coercive; that is to say, individuals are compelled by threats from other people to do what they would rather not do. This may extend the range of choices of whoever is doing the threatening, but it restricts the choices of the individual being threatened, and so runs counter to what anarchists see as the purpose of human society. For historical reasons, anarchist writers have often tended to concentrate on the threat of…
