---
title: "Caleb Williams"
author: "William Godwin"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/godwin-caleb-williams"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Or, Things as They Are"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "godwin-caleb-williams.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/godwin-caleb-williams.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     DRAMATIS PERSONAE      INTRODUCTION      PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR.      AUTHOR'S LATEST PREFACE.      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.    VOLUME THE FIRST.      CHAPTER I.      CHAPTER II.      CHAPTER III.      CHAPTER IV.      CHAPTER V.      CHAPTER VI.      CHAPTER VII.      CHAPTER VIII.      CHAPTER IX.      CHAPTER X.      CHAPTER XI.      CHAPTER XII.    VOLUME THE SECOND.      CHAPTER I.      CHAPTER II.      CHAPTER III.      CHAPTER IV.      CHAPTER V.      CHAPTER VI.      CHAPTER VII.      CHAPTER VIII.      CHAPTER IX.      CHAPTER X.      CHAPTER XI.      CHAPTER XII.      CHAPTER XIII.      CHAPTER XIV.    VOLUME THE THIRD.      CHAPTER I.      CHAPTER II.      CHAPTER III.      CHAPTER IV.      CHAPTER V.      CHAPTER VI.      CHAPTER VII.      CHAPTER VIII.      CHAPTER IX.      CHAPTER X.      CHAPTER XI.      CHAPTER XII.      CHAPTER XIII.      CHAPTER XIV.      CHAPTER XV.    POSTSCRIPT.      THE END.    FOOTNOTES MR. FERDINANDO FALKLAND, a high-spirited and highly cultured gentleman, a country squire in "a remote county of England." CALEB WILLIAMS, a youth, his secretary, the discoverer of his secret, and the supposed narrator of the consequent events. MR. COLLINS, Falkland's steward and Caleb's friend. THOMAS, a servant of Falkland's. MR. FORESTER, Falkland's brother-in-law. MR. BARNABAS TYRREL, a brutal and tyrannical squire. MISS EMILY MELVILLE, his cousin and dependent, whom he cruelly maltreats and does to death. GRIMES, a brutal rustic, suborned by Tyrrel to abduct Miss Melville. DR. WILSON; MRS. HAMMOND, friends of Miss Melville. MR. HAWKINS, farmer; YOUNG HAWKINS, his son, Victims of Tyrrel's brutality, and wrongfully hanged as his murderers. GINES, a robber and thief-taker, instrument of Falkland's vengeance upon Caleb. MR. RAYMOND, an "Arcadian" captain of robbers. LARKINS, one of his band. AN OLD HAG, housekeeper to the robbers. A GAOLER. MISS PEGGY, the gaoler's daughter. MRS. MARNEY, a poor gentlewoman, Caleb's friend in distress. MR. SPURREL, a friend who informs on Caleb. MRS. DENISON, a cultivated lady with whom Caleb is for a while on friendly terms. The reputation of WILLIAM GODWIN as a social philosopher, and the merits of his famous novel, "Caleb Williams," have been for more than a century the subject of extreme divergencies of judgment among critics. "The first systematic anarchist," as he is called by Professor Saintsbury, aroused bitter contention with his writings during his own lifetime, and his opponents have remained so prejudiced that even the staid bibliographer Allibone, in his "Dictionary of English Literature," a place where one would think the most flagitious author safe from animosity, speaks of Godwin's private life in terms that are little less than scurrilous. Over against this persistent acrimony may be put the fine eulogy of Mr. C. Kegan Paul, his biographer, to represent the favourable judgment of our own time, whilst I will venture to quote one remarkable passage that voices the opinions of many among Godwin's most eminent contemporaries. In "The Letters of Charles Lamb," Sir T.N. Talfourd says: "Indifferent altogether to the politics of the age, Lamb could not help being struck with productions of its newborn energies so remarkable as the works and the character of Godwin. He seemed to realise in himself what Wordsworth long afterwards described, 'the central calm at the heart of all agitation.' Through the medium of his mind the stormy convulsions of society were seen 'silent as in a picture.' Paradoxes the most daring wore the air of deliberate wisdom as he pronounced them. He foretold the future happiness of mankind, not with the inspiration of the poet, but with the grave and passionless voice of the oracle. There was nothing better calculated at once to feed and to make steady the enthusiasm of youthful patriots than the high speculations in which he taught them to engage, on the nature of social evils and the great destiny of his species. No one would have …
