---
title: "An-arrgh-chy"
author: "Peter T. Leeson"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-t-leeson-an-arrgh-chy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Law and Economics of Pirate Organization"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-t-leeson-an-arrgh-chy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-t-leeson-an-arrgh-chy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     I. Introduction      II. A “Nest of Rogues      III. Merchant Ship Organization        A. Efficient Autocracy        B. The Problem of Captain Predation      IV. Pirate Ship Organization        A. Piratical Checks and Balances        B. Pirate Constitutions      V. Was Pirate Organization Efficient?        A. Pirate Booty        B. A Comparison to Privateer Organization        C. A Comparison to Explorer Organization      VI. Conclusion Nature, we see, teaches the most Illiterate the necessary Prudence for their Preservation . . . these Men whom we term, and not without Reason, the Scandal of human Nature, who were abandoned to all Vice, and lived by Rapine; when they judged it for their Interest . . . were strictly just. . . among themselves. (Captain Charles Johnson 1726–28, 527) Pirates are known for raucousness, recklessness, and chaotic rapine.Pirate reality, however, is quite another picture. Real-life pirates were highly organized criminals. Unlike the swashbuckling psychopaths of fiction, historical pirates displayed sophisticated organization and coordination. Pirates could not use government to enforce or otherwise support cooperative arrangements between them. Despite this, they successfully cooperated with hundreds of other rogues. Amidst ubiquitous potential for conflict, they rarely fought, stole from, or deceived one another. In fact, piratical harmony was as common as harmony among their lawful contemporaries who relied on government for social cooperation. How did “these men whom we term . . . the Scandal of human Nature, who were abandoned to all Vice, and lived by Rapine” ( Johnson [1726–28]1999, 527) [1] accomplish this impressive level of order? Becker (1968) was the first to apply the logic of rational-choice decision making to criminals. Following him, a number of others extended this logic to decision making in the context of organized outlaws. Fiorentini and Peltzman (1995) provide the best and most comprehensive collection of essays that consider the economics of criminal organization. In addition, a large literature discusses the economic impact of organized crime, activities of criminal organizations, optimal strategies for preventing organized crime, and reasons for its emergence (see also,e.g., Anderson 1979; Reuter 1983, 1987; Jennings 1984; Arlacchi 1986; Jankowski 1991; Dick 1995; Konrad and Skaperdas 1998; Garoupa 2000; Skaperdas 2001; Chang, Lu, and Chen 2005). Unlike these topics, the internal governance institutions of violent criminal organizations have received relatively little attention. [2] The difficulty of “getting inside” criminal organizations is largely responsible for this. Levitt and Venkatesh’s important work on street gangs (Levittand Venkatesh 2000; Venkatesh and Levitt 2000) is an exception to this rule, as are Gambetta’s (1993) and Reuter’s (1983) superb studies of the Mafia. However, Levitt and Venkatesh focus on the financial organization of gangs rather than on their governance structures. Gambetta’s and Reuter’s studies are primarily concerned with the Mafia’s provision of protection to outsiders and the organization of the illegal markets it serves. This article investigates the internal governance institutions of violent criminal enterprise by examining the law, economics, and organization of pirates. [3] These “most treacherous rogues” terrorized the Caribbean, Atlantic Ocean, and Indian Ocean during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Pirates formed a loose confederation of maritime bandits outside the law of any government. To effectively organize their banditry, pirates required mechanisms to prevent internal predation, minimize crew conflict, and maximize piratical profit. I argue that pirates devised two institutions for this purpose. First, I analyze the system of piratical checks and balances that crews used to constrain captain predation. Second, I examine how pirates used democratic constitutions to minimize conflict and create piratical law and o…
