---
title: "A Critique of the Draft Program of the Left Green Network"
author: "Janet Biehl, Murray Bookchin"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/murray-bookchin-and-janet-biehl-a-critique-of-the-draft-program-of-the-left-green-network"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Online source RevoltLib.com, retrieved on November 20, 2020."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "murray-bookchin-and-janet-biehl-a-critique-of-the-draft-program-of-the-left-green-network.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/murray-bookchin-and-janet-biehl-a-critique-of-the-draft-program-of-the-left-green-network.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Integrate the Hierarchy?        A General or a Particularistic Interest?        Capitalism with a Human Face?        Left Greens as Social Engineers?        Reform or Revolution? Editors note: The Left Green Network is in the process of writing, developing and debating its program. The draft proposal for the program was published in the April/May 1991 issue of the Network's organizing bulletin, Left Green Notes, number 7. The following critique was written in response to that program. The proposed program will be debated at the upcoming continental conference of the Network, over the July 4 weekend in Chicago, Illinois. To receive a copy of the draft program, and/or information about the continental conference, please write to the Social Ecology Project at the masthead address, or to the Left Green Network, P.O. Box 5566, Burlington, Vermont 05402. The proposed Left Green Network program, as it was published in Left Green Notes, is very much at odds with itself. Lacking coherence, it mixes high-minded revolutionary rhetoric with pragmatic, often blatant forms of social engineering, leaving the thinking reader confused as to its essential intentions and goals. The "strategy" section of the proposed program, for example, states that the Left Green Network "refus[es] to take responsibility for the impossible task of making an irrational system rational," a formulation with which we certainly agree, having emphasized it in our own statements. The proposed program also defines the Left Green Network as a "fundamental opposition" and defines Left Greens as social ecologists. Splendid! This is very much to the good. The same is true for the brief explanation of libertarian municipalism and similar broad views. But often quite suddenly the reader then encounters concrete demands for "reconstruction" that are little more than liberal in character. In some of its most far-reaching sections, the proposed program presents Left Greens as fundamentally antihierarchical and antistatist, yet ironically, many of its planks presuppose the very existence of the nation-state that it is committed to abolishing. Similarly, the proposed program presents Left Greens as anticapitalist, but some of its key demands can easily be satisfied within the very capitalistic system it so forcefully opposes. In what follows, we shall single out some of the more important - at times, even absurd - errors that we believe Left Greens should carefully consider in altering the proposed program or in developing a new one. "The various forms of hierarchy and domination that permeate our society," the proposed program reads, "are integrated by two overarching institutions today: the capitalist economy and the nation-state If we are to have an ecological society, capitalism and the nation-state must be uprooted and replaced by new decentralized forms of grassroots political and economic democracy." So far, so good. And the proposed program commendably makes an attempt to define short-term goals (minimum program) and long-term goals (maximum program). But unfortunately, these two types of goals become convoluted in the text so that they are often not clearly distinguished from each other and sometimes interlace with each other somewhat carelessly. Many of the minimum demands, in fact, contradict the maximum program. Thus, at the same time that the proposed program calls for the destruction of hierarchy and the state on the one hand, it makes demands that presuppose the existence of state and hierarchy, on the other hand. We read under "public health service," for example, that Left Greens want "national health service boards." Perhaps the use of the word national here was simply an oversight. But we also read that Left Greens want to "democratize the United Nations," of all things, and we find this formulation astonishing! Obviously, the United Nations is actually the United Nation-States. This demand thus amounts to tacit recognition of nation-states - presumably,…
