---
title: "The Anarchist Transmitter of Sabato Rodia"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-transmetropolitan-review-the-anarchist-transmitter-of-sabato-rodia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 18 March 2024 from thetransmetropolitanreview.wordpress.com."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-transmetropolitan-review-the-anarchist-transmitter-of-sabato-rodia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-transmetropolitan-review-the-anarchist-transmitter-of-sabato-rodia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I: Sleepless In Seattle        II: The Short, Angry Life of Pellegrino Rodia        III: West Coast Is The Best Coast        IV: Terremoto Anarchico        V: The Years of Lead        VI: The Times of Chaos        VII: The Shards of Light        VIII: The Great Transmitter of Watts        IX: Charging The Tower        X: The First Watts Transmission        XI: The Second Watts Transmission California knows how to party In the city of LA In the city of good old Watts -Tupac Shakur, California Love , 1995 In the summer of 1910, an anarchist named Sabato Rodia arrived in Seattle, a humble Italian worker visiting his brother and their comrades. Later known to the world as Sam Rodia, back then he was Sabato; quiet, passionate, and fiercely committed to the beautiful idea of anarchism where there would no more masters or slaves but only free people living as equals, their imaginations and agency unchained from the constraints of church and capital, free to soar to unknown heights. When he arrived in Seattle, thirty-five year-old Sabato had recently separated from his wife and was estranged from his three children. In May of 1909, his wife Lucia Ucci had gone to the police near Berkeley, California and claimed Sabato had given her a black eye. Later, after her husband was arrested, she went back to the police and claimed it was a mistake, that she got the black after falling down the stairs. Several months later, in February of 1910, he filed for divorce from Lucia under the charge of cruelty. It would seem that Sabato was fleeing his old life down in Oakland and Berkeley, where he had lived with his wife and family since 1905. The sad part is that he met his wife in Seattle and lived there with her and their first son from 1902 to 1905. It would also seem that Sabato’s attempt at legal divorce from Lucia failed, or was never followed through on, but that didn’t stop him from leaving for Seattle in the summer of 1910. We only know he was there because of an Italian anarchist newspaper called Cronaca Sovversiva , the most important of its time, and in the July 16, 1910 issue, we find that Sabato donated 25 cents to the paper. Alongside his brother Antonio, those listed as donating from Seattle that week include the great Ersilia Cavedagni and her young partner Leon Morel, a famed metal-caster. Ersilia was close comrades with Antonio Rodia, having known him since at least 1908, and it’s likely that they were both instrumental in opening the Social Studies Club at 1001 Weller Street in Seattle. While the doors of this space didn’t open to the public until December of 1910, it’s likely that the local Italian anarchists were using it as a private meeting hall in the lead up to the grand opening, and it’s highly possible Sabato Rodia met there with his brother, Ersilia, and Leon. The Social Studies Club was located at the top of the bluff now known as Little Saigon, just on the border with Chinatown, or the International District. For many years, the Italian anarchists of Seattle who subscribed to Cronaca Sovversiva had their papers delivered to either a Japanese fruit stand at 801 Charles Street, or to an anonymous Italian grocery store somewhere in the city, and for this reason, neither historians nor the authorities knew where most of these anarchist subscribers lived. We don’t know where Antonio Rodia was living when his brother Sabato came to visit Seattle in the summer of 1910, but we do know that Antonio was still an off-and-on miner, just as his brother Sabato used to be. Many years before, in 1890, the first of the Rodia brothers left their town of Serino, Italy and traveled across the sea to Philadelphia. This was Pellegrino, born in 1875, and he soon found work in the Pennsylvania coal fields, a place where he spread the anarchism he’d absorbed in his native Italy. From what information is available, we know that Pellegrino (literally pilgrim in Italian) worked and agitated in the Pennsylvania coal mines from 1890 until 1…
