---
title: "Czechoslovakia in the Context of Nestor Makhno’s Exile (1922–1924)"
author: "Jakub Frynta"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jakub-frynta-czechoslovakia-in-the-context-of-nestor-makhno-s-exile-1922-1924"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Старожитності Лукомор’я, (4), 59–75 Retrieved on 1st November 2023 from www.lukomor.mosk.mksat.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jakub-frynta-czechoslovakia-in-the-context-of-nestor-makhno-s-exile-1922-1924.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jakub-frynta-czechoslovakia-in-the-context-of-nestor-makhno-s-exile-1922-1924.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ARCHIVAL DOCUMENTS          № 1.          № 2          № 3          № 4          № 5 Abstract: The article introduces two handwritten letters of Nestor Makhno to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Czechoslovakia and to President Tomáš G. Masaryk. It also publishes hitherto unknown documents from the Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic that partly charted Makhno’s fate in the years 1922–1924. The article expands and completes the source base of research on Makhno’s exile. For the first time, it puts these sources in the context of the Russian Aid Operation and activities of Makhno in Poland. An analysis of the two letters reveals how Makhno perceived Czechoslovakia; what he expected from it and how he presented himself to T.G. Masaryk. On the basis of archival documents, the attitude of the Czechoslovak authorities towards Makhno can be partially explained. Based on his historical experience, Makhno compared the Czech nation to that of the Ukrainians, and he also believed that «Czechoslovak Slavonicity» could indicate potential solidarity with the Ukrainian nation. Initially, in Czechoslovakia, Makhno intended to launch his resistance against Bolshevism. Nevertheless, although the sources are ambiguous, owing to the miserable living conditions experienced in Polish exile, it is likely that he also dreamed of repatriation from Czechoslovakia. Moreover, Makhno was purposely vague in describing his role and the situation in Poland to Masaryk to curry favour. Due to Czechoslovakia’s geopolitical goals, any tendencies towards an uprising against Bolshevism with the goal of Ukrainian independence were perceived rather negatively. The Czechoslovak authorities viewed Makhno unfavourably because of the Polish press. He was described as a «bogeyman» of the landowners, and was seen as a distrustful bandit rather than a principled anarchist. During 1921 Nestor Makhno gradually began to lose the «backbone» of makhnovshchina – the war-demoralised peasantry. He and his followers were under constant pressure from the Red Army and forced to flee into exile. He stayed seven months in Romania, then escaped in chaotic circumstances to Poland, where he spent just over two years. Makhno thus spent the rest of his life in adverse and desperate conditions. Moreover, in states that were ashamed of his presence and in which he aroused fears. Makhno and makhnovshchina have become the subject of study by many Ukrainian, Russian and Anglo-Saxon historians such as V.A. Savchenko, [1] V.N. Volkovynskyi, [2] V.M. Chop, [3] A.V. Shubin, [4] M. Palij [5] and C. Darch. [6] Research on Makhno’s exile has often focused on his stay in Romania, Poland, Germany, and France. The Polish historians M. Przyborowski and D. Wierzchoś have made a significant contribution to the research, publishing documents from the fonds of the Polish archives, which complement the archival materials in the Czech Republic. [7] However, within the historiography of Makhno’s exile, the issue of Czechoslovakia has been neglected. Interpretations have often been limited to the thesis that Makhno tried to escape to Czechoslovakia or that he asked the Polish authorities to allow him to leave. [8] For example, Ukrainian historian Olena Humeniuk only briefly described that one of the reasons Makhno was interned were rumours of his possible escape to Czechoslovakia. She also noted that these rumours were based on the contents of Makhno’s letter to the Czechoslovak President Tomáš G. Masaryk, in which he «described his situation and asked to be admitted in the country». [9] The study introduces two handwritten letters of Makhno to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Czechoslovakia and to T.G. Masaryk. Both letters are stored in the Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic (AMZV). The Foreign Ministry received the first letter on 7 August, [10] and the second on 22 August 1922. [11] A copy of the second letter sent by Makhno to Masaryk, whic…
