---
title: "Civilization Will Eat Itself"
author: "Ran Prieur"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ran-prieur-civilization-will-eat-itself"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. See creativecommons.org for details. Retrieved on 25 May 2010 from ranprieur.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ran-prieur-civilization-will-eat-itself.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ran-prieur-civilization-will-eat-itself.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A Summary Of The Fall Of Civilization I mean to end this civilization. What gets you out of bed in the morning? I’m writing this introductory part after finishing the main text, which is a deviation from my usual process. I edit in my head and write straight to final draft. It worked beautifully in three issues of my zine Superweed, but this time, after six pages, I struck a narrative that carried me all the way to the end, and in that context the early pages seemed disjointed and irrelevant. So I’m overwriting them. I’ve always had a thing about techno-industrial civilization. The scent that gives me the deepest nostalgia — I don’t know why — is fresh tar. My mom says that when I was a little kid I was fascinated by construction cranes. Even now, after years in the city, I still think skyscrapers are really cool, and I often pause, while walking over the freeway, to stare in awe at all the cars. In third grade I would show off my spelling talent by spelling the word civilization, and the most serious addiction I’ve ever had was to the computer game Civilization II. I played it 15–20 hours a week in late 1999. Remember the Prince song, “tonight I’m gonna party like it’s 1999”? That sounded like a big deal in 1985. Then when 1999 came it became a joke. “Tonight I’m gonna party like it’s this year.” Now the song seems dead, but wait: Suppose, in the future, 1999 is looked back on as the peak year of our civilization. Then the song will live again with a meaning no one guessed. 1999 is the obvious choice for the peak year — before the dot-com crash, before the WTO protest, before the New Democrats, who oversaw a global concentration of wealth and tightening of power that even shocked some Republicans, lost the White House. Of course, 1999 will not be the peak when the consciousness that makes History is focused on something other than the momentary dominant perspective in the USA. In the long view, the peak may be seen to have come sooner, maybe much sooner. I was going to say it couldn’t possibly come later, but then I thought: Suppose the bottom falls out of the global food supply, and 90% of us die from starvation, or from diseases caused by industry and technology, or from wars fought with secret energy weapons. And suppose, of the remaining 10%, 90% live on the surface, in straw bale houses and abandoned buildings, eating garden vegetables and old canned food, while 10% live in sealed underground compounds, with super-advanced bio- and nanotechnology. These people can and will adjust their perspectives to declare themselves at an all-time peak of human progress. We have done exactly the same thing. Compared to all but a handful of our ancestors, we live tiny, painful lives. Did you know that Americans used to have a 35-hour work week? The evidence survives in our language, in the phrase “9 to 5.” Did you ever think to question where that came from, when actual day jobs are 8 to 5? Me neither, until someone told me: people literally did work 9 to 5, seven hours of labor and an hour for lunch, and they counted their lunch hour when they called it an eight hour day and a 40 hour week. We have been tricked into working an extra five hours a week. Times 52 weeks a year, or 50 for the lucky ones with vacation, that’s 250 hours, or more than an extra six weeks a year , that we’ve been tricked into working. And that’s just the people with hourly wages. People with salaries, in every case I’ve seen, work 50 or 60 or 80 hours a week. We focus on foreign sweatshops to hide from the awful recognition of our personal sweatshops. Kids in some country work 16 hour days in factories for pennies an hour, but our own kids work 16 hour days, in compulsory schooling designed to strangle creativity and independent thinking, in homework designed to train them for a life of tedious meaningless labor, in highly controlled “activities” designed to replace improvised play. And instead of being paid pennies an hour we have to pay dollars an hou…
