---
title: "Cascading Currencies and National Liberation — the Situation in México"
author: "Matt Miscreant"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matt-miscreant-cascading-currencies-and-national-liberation-the-situation-in-mexico"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "1995 Mar/Apr issue of L&amp;R. Retrieved on 2016-06-13 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "matt-miscreant-cascading-currencies-and-national-liberation-the-situation-in-mexico.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/matt-miscreant-cascading-currencies-and-national-liberation-the-situation-in-mexico.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Plummeting Peso        War, But No Shooting        Reformists or Anti-Vanguardists?        North American Solidarity [Update as of Feb. 20: This article was written before Feb. 9, when México’s president, Ernesto Zedillo, announced a new offensive against the Zapatistas. The Mexican government now claims to have identified several Zapatista leaders, including Subcommander Marcos, and to have arrested Zapatistas in Mexico City and Veracruz who were preparing to spread the struggle beyond Chiapas. The EZLN responds in their Feb. 9 communiqué [page 3]. In the recent offensive, the Mexican Federal Army took Zapatista towns on the edge of the Lacandona Jungle, causing the Zapatistas to retreat into the jungle, along with the majority of the non-combatant population. Reports of torture, murder, and rape from areas where the civilian population could not retreat are gruesome indeed. The army has also indiscriminately bombed civilian areas in this new offensive, just like in Jan. 1994. Demonstrations have shaken Mexico City this past week, showing the Mexican government the unpopularity of their brutal offensive and forcing them to call a brief halt to it after one week. Demonstrations have also taken place throughout North America and Europe in support of the EZLN. The Mexican Federal Army soon renewed hostilities against the Zapatistas.] The situation in México is precarious as we go to press. The devaluation of the peso has caused the cost of everything to rise, with no corresponding wage increase anywhere in sight. Meanwhile, the Zapatista National Liberation Army [EZLN] had met with representatives of the Institutional Revolutionary Party [PRI] government in the EZLN-controlled Lacandona Jungle about restarting a dialogue for peace. Not long before these talks began, the EZLN issued a “Third Declaration of the Lacandona Jungle,” [see pages 18–19] calling for a National Liberation Movement led by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas to fight the PRI state by any means necessary. The choice of Cárdenas to lead this movement raises important questions about the EZLN, their politics, and the future of the revolution they have begun in México. In the US the National Commission for Democracy in México, USA [NCDM] was having some success in bringing local Zapatista solidarity groups of various political orientations together into a national organization. As Carlos Salinas de Gortari’s term ended as President of México, it became apparent that the peso, México’s currency, was overvalued. Devaluations of the peso have occurred at the end of each Mexican president’s six-year term for the past few presidencies, each time plunging the country into economic crises of varying degrees. A devaluation toward the end of Salinas’s term would have hurt the PRI’s chances in the August elections and Salinas’s candidacy to become head of the new World Trade Organization. As México’s currency reserves dwindled too low to support México’s debt a devaluation could not be put off any longer. With the devaluation of the peso, the price of imported goods in México skyrocketed, causing a chain reaction that caused the price of everything to rise. Despite an order by the Mexican government that stores not raise prices for 60 days, all necessities immediately became more expensive. Many families suddenly found themselves unable to purchase even milk or eggs, much less meat. Despite the devaluation, an unusually recalcitrant Mexican Labor Confederation [CTM, the PRI-controlled union that represents non-agricultural Mexican workers in the state structure] agreed to limit wages to the previously agreed 7% raise for this year. Meanwhile, inflation spiraled far beyond 7%. Although Clinton’s $50+ billion bailout of México will stabilize inflation, prices are being stabilized much higher than they were in mid-December. Lamely, the PRI government tried to blame the crisis on the Zapatista offensive that began on Dec. 19 (the first devaluation took place on Dec. 20). However,…
