---
title: "Co-operatives or class struggle?"
author: "Tommy Lawson"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tommy-lawson-co-operatives-or-class-struggle"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 16 April 2024 from redblacknotes.com."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tommy-lawson-co-operatives-or-class-struggle.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tommy-lawson-co-operatives-or-class-struggle.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Every so often the question of co-operatives is raised in the revolutionary socialist movement. Optimistic positions suggest that co-ops can form the basis for replacing capitalism with a new economy based on solidarity and labour where workers have ‘control’ and even suggest they are a vital part of revolutionary strategy. These positions have both contemporary and historical antecedents and the arguments still continue. However the positive features of cooperatives are still no replacement for revolutionary strategy and building working class power against capitalism. Debates over the role of cooperatives in revolutionary strategy can be traced back to the 1850s and the First International when Mutualists like Pierre Joseph Proudhon and the Communard Charles Beslay advocated co-operative based economies. They believed that as workers accumulated their own funds and invested them together co-operatives could slowly come to replace individually owned capitalist enterprises. While they proposed a variety of schemes to make this come to fruition, the reality was that capital could not be adjusted to serve the working class. The Mutualists reformist positions were challenged by people like Joseph Dejacque and Eugene Varlin, who understood that capital must be confronted and overthrown by militant, armed working class struggle. In Australia today the main cooperative enterprise enthusiasts point to is Earthworker. Earthworker makes ‘renewable energy appliances and components’ and sees itself as ‘part of ensuring a just transition for communities affected by the move from fossil fuels to renewable sources of energy…’ This is at least true of the initial Earthworker project, which took over a factory that was shut following the end of the coal power industry in the LaTrobe Valley, Victoria. Earthworker has since expanded into cleaning services and is open to expanding into new projects. Earthworker notes that they ‘believe social and environmental exploitation are intertwined, and that the problems of climate change, job insecurity and growing inequality must be tackled simultaneously, through greater grassroots economic ownership.’ However the question must be asked just how far ‘greater grassroots economic ownership’ reaches against the gigantic power of the fossil fuel industry and international corporations. The power of a few workers united in a small enterprise pales against organised labour, the only force capable of reckoning with capital. Historically even when workers pool their resources and attempt to create ‘alternative’ economies these end up either failing or being forced to adapt to traditional business practices in order to be competitive. None of this is to disparage the efforts nor the people involved in an enterprise like Earthworker. The birth of Earthworker was an organic response to the loss of jobs and filling an open niche in the market. But parts of the radical left in Australia and its support for cooperatives still has to be critiqued. In Victorian Socialists latest program, the section on ‘Workers and Unions’ presents a policy that aims to ‘introduce measures that encourage worker control and participation in decision making in the workplace..’ via legal reforms that ensure workers receive governance rights, a share of profits and the additional measure of imposing higher payroll taxes on non-cooperative businesses. They would also offer tax concessions to cooperatives encouraging them as the ‘normalised form of private enterprise’. As though the working class benefits from private enterprise and more competition! [1] Market socialism may result from an imperfect or aborted attempt at revolution, but it is not something to be actively fought for. Such ideas are really irrelevant in the current context of economics and class struggle. Capitalism has already developed such immense productive forces that a future revolution should take seriously the task of abolishing production for exchange value. Commodit…
