---
title: "The Free Ones (Der Freien)"
author: "Max Stirner"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/max-stirner-the-free-ones-der-freien"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "“Die Freien” first appeared in the Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 195, July 14, 1842. Republished in Stirner’s Kleinere Schriften hrs. John Henry Mackay (Berlin: Bernhard Zack, 1914); republished (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Friedrich Frommann Verlag, 1976). pp. 132–141. The addenda of Max Stirner o"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "max-stirner-the-free-ones-der-freien.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/max-stirner-the-free-ones-der-freien.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The Königsberger Zeitung was first to report the existence of the club “Free Ones,” and their report was soon followed by a series of others directed to this same topic by almost every other newspaper. The club has had to suffer such vehement and fanatical attack that even any opponent of the group, if he did not consider violence a virtue, must ask, that given such enemies, if this club really has no rights whatsoever. Certainly, this club might be considered worthy of attention by anyone who understands the importance of intellectual trends; but in any case, it must be quietly considered, and one must presuppose the best, as it is with this presupposition that one must begin in every court proceeding and with every criticism. Most newspapers broke out in a furious storm against the “Free Ones,” with the lead being taken by the Spenes’sche [1] with its frightening call that “The Autonomy of the Spirit [2] is the fruit of a childish conceit and a sinful misjudgment of the limits of human understanding, and in that Christian community, wherein whose womb such a propaganda of disbelief would have nourished itself, a judgment of a deeper degeneracy can be pronounced.” They ring out storm bells against the heretics and clearly enough point out the club [Knüttel] [3] to the people of Berlin by which they can also re-enact in our own Market that lovely mob-scene held against Strauss in Zurich. [4] Certainly, in our city, the deepest contempt of its fellow citizens would greet those who would openly teach the adoration of the human spirit rather than devotion to the church! They would not tolerate the tendency of a group, whose opinions are only employed in order to undermine the moral grounds of civil society, nor allow its gates and doors to be open to the entrance of this most capricious and be opened for principles whose practical consequences would require bullet-proof vests under coats and to completely lock up both home and family for their protection. The “Kolnische” [5] dressed up these few crude words and paraphrased them into three large columns. However in so honoring its sister, it lowered not only its own honor but those it represented as well—the educated and Christian world. No, those who consider themselves to be permitted to make a public statement over the merits of the intellectual currents of their time, should at least have a measure of culture, and in their exposition betray at least some attempt to penetrate into the subject matter. Indeed, the public does not read newspapers in order to commiserate with some shaking statements of cowardly fears, but to read important and well-written reports. How much more worthily has the Aachener Zeitung conducted itself, for although it is otherwise opposed to the Freien , it nevertheless has stood up with faultless candor and has declared itself against all intervention by “governmental actions.” But your newspaper has already taken up this matter in a series of leading articles which on every occasion display prejudice. For us, who draw upon all forms of liberalism, forms so heavy and meaningful in our changing times, and who would seek to overhear the fundamental issues and to secure our relative right against obstinate fault, there is no sound so fitting than that of the quiet and more fearless reflection that you have loudly criticized. Whoever looks danger in the eye, overcomes it, or at least it frightens them no more. [6] You have already reported that a club, the “Free Ones” exists, and in the manner it does exist. I’ll pass these reports along as they come in, but at the moment I will only state that the majority, as well as the leading voices of the group, fear that the absurd ideas of the club being developed will rob them of something they hold very dear. Certainly, the Königsberger Zeitung bears some blame for its fragmentary and hurried representations of the intentions of this group. Now, let us see what the “Free Ones” really want—what “they openly present…
