---
title: "Becoming-Drawer as Becoming-Other"
author: "Irina Zherebkina"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/irina-zherebkina-becoming-drawer-as-becoming-other"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "In Memory of Davyd Chychkan"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "irina-zherebkina-becoming-drawer-as-becoming-other.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/irina-zherebkina-becoming-drawer-as-becoming-other.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Davyd Chychkan, who was born into a family of artists (both of his parents, his grandfather, and great-grandfather were all professional artists), was present at the origins of the grassroots anti-fascist street movement in Kyiv in the 2000s. When the full-scale Russian war against Ukraine began, he was actively involved in anti-fascist street graffiti. Unlike those representatives of Ukrainian culture who prefer to “join the soldiers” remotely—e.g., through charity concerts and donations to the army—he enlisted in the army and asked to be sent to the front line, where he died on August 10, 2025. Davyd critically assessed market-oriented professional art and deliberately refused to receive a higher education in art. As a true nonsystemic anarchist, he was engaged in noninstitutional self-education: he read left-wing and anarchist theorists and contemporary political philosophers, whose ideas he sought to embody in his work. Davyd saw the future of Ukraine not as nationalist and bourgeois, but as internationalist and socialist. As a result, ultraright nationalists regularly smashed the work in his exhibitions. Today, after his death, they declare him a hero. During his lifetime Davyd refused to accept the “elevated” title of “artist.” Instead, emphasizing his anarchist non-belonging to the guild identity, he referred to himself as a “ рисувальник ,” a “draftsman” or “drawer.” It is thus hardly likely that he would have agreed to be called a “hero,” especially by representatives of those nationalist groups who, again, vandalized his “treacherous” exhibitions, calling him a “separatist” and a “servant of Moscow.” Today, in a situation of war, the question of who deserves to be called a “hero” in Ukraine is above all a matter of collective belonging, signifying adherence to the body of a heroic nation and the traditions of authentic Ukrainian national identity, like the military salutes of Stepan Bandera’s Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and Ukrainian Insurgent Army. Such an understanding of heroism seems far removed from the political consciousness of contemporary Western societies, which the American war theorist Edward Nicolae Luttwak defines as “post-heroic.” [1] In European history, Luttwak notes, mass deaths on the battlefield and military heroism were indeed celebrated as a norm of social life. But what allowed this heroism? According to Luttwak, it was made possible by the phenomenon of so-called “spare” male children. For example, in agricultural European households, one male could inherit the family’s land, another might marry a land-owning wife, and the others were considered “spare children” whose fate was to go to war and die there. [2] In the second half of the twentieth century, the birth rate in developed Western societies declined. As a result, the reserve of “spare children” was exhausted, the era of so-called “new wars” began. These wars, according to Mary Kaldor, have shifted to periphery countries, and are waged as proxy wars, where developed states deploy force indirectly. [3] The main threat to Ukraine, according to Kaldor, is the war turning into a protracted and fragmented conflict in which warlords, armed groups, and oligarchs reproduce themselves through sporadic violence. This would constitute a victory for Putin. Can we not say that in the era of new wars, the phenomenon of “heroism” is sustained by fighters from social groups who are forced to play the role of “spare children,” superfluous to their national motherlands? The thesis that heroism today is devalued in the political life of Western societies is shared by Alain Badiou, who, unlike Luttwak, defines the modern zeitgeist not as a state of post-heroism, but as a situation of disorientation, a large-scale devaluation and instrumentalization of values. [4] Wendy Brown calls this a state of nihilism that nourishes forms of “negative solidarity,” where the survival of one social group is possible only at the expense of another. [5] In disori…
