---
title: "Anti-PAN Work"
author: "Luis Fernandez, Shiu-Ming Cheer"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/shiu-ming-cheer-and-luis-fernandez-anti-pan-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Engaging With Communities of Color in Arizona"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "shiu-ming-cheer-and-luis-fernandez-anti-pan-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/shiu-ming-cheer-and-luis-fernandez-anti-pan-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Background        Using Reformist Strategies to Reach a Revolutionary Goal        Intra- and Inter-Organizational Tensions Among Anti-PAN Organizations        Our Strategies In crisis there is opportunity and the impending placement of the “Protect Arizona Now” (PAN) initiative on Arizona’s November ballot (named Prop 200) provides us the opportunity to engage with people of color communities as well as a range of left-leaning organizations and individuals. At its core, PAN is a racist proposition seeking to deny social services to undocumented workers. Arguing that immigrants “cost the tax payers a lot of money,” PAN criminalizes the act of giving State services to any undocumented worker. However, the real impact of the proposition is the preservation of white privilege through the intimidation of the Mexican undocumented laborers. In Phoenix, Bring the Ruckus has been searching for an issue with the potential to build power in communities of color, thereby challenging white supremacy. The anti-war efforts, while aimed in part at reigning in the military industrial complex and fighting U.S. imperialism, did not involve many people of color here. We view immigration as one issue that could mobilize the communities that we wish to work with in Arizona. However, we have been searching for an angle from which to organize. We currently think that PAN provides an angle. PAN has already shown itself to be a hot-button issue with the ability to galvanize different constituencies – 26 organizations have already submitted statements for the November voting guide against PAN. They include elected officials at various levels and groups ranging from the Libertarian Party to the Arizona Hispanic Community Forum to Unions and more grassroots organizations. Because PAN is an electoral issue, we must use some traditional electoral organizing strategies in our efforts to defeat it. This includes voter registration, rallies, press conferences and get-out-the-vote efforts, which legitimize the existing political system and fail to challenge the two party dictatorship. However, even if our strategy isn’t revolutionary, our goal is. Our primary goal is to challenge white privilege and organizing against PAN provides the mechanism to do this at this point. This work also gives us the ability to foster relationships with groups and organizations with strong ties to communities of color. As of now, the PAN initiative is the issue galvanizing people of color in Arizona. In Tucson, the anti-PAN organizing has been spearheaded by immigrant rights organizations such as Derechos Humanos, Border Action Network, and the American Friends Service Committee. These groups have a base in the immigrant communities near the border, as well as strong ties to the Sanctuary Movement. In Phoenix, the Statue of Liberty Coalition (SLC) has been leading the contra-PAN efforts. SLC’s uber-patriotic name is problematic, perhaps caused by its liberal Chicano leadership and their desire to show allegiance to American Ideas. It also reflects their centrist politics and their interest in courting the middle class vote. SLC is coordinated by heavyweights in the Chicano community with strong ties to elected officials and other power elites. However, much of their membership is grassroots, including representatives from SEIU, Cadena Comite (a Chicano/a led student group working on legalization for undocumented students), ACORN, and other organizations. Our hope is to connect with these more grassroots groups, hoping to play a role in the direction and framing of the struggle. Ruckus has also been working with a third group called Communities Against PAN (CAP), a group that initially was started by progressive white college students. However, the make up of the group is quickly changing as more Chicano students come to the table. With their help, we were able to organize a coordinating meeting for possible anti-PAN work in Tempe. The meeting had over twenty participants fr…
