---
title: "Class Struggle Anarchism"
author: "Kent Worcester, Wayne Price"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kent-worcester-class-struggle-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Interview with Wayne Price"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kent-worcester-class-struggle-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kent-worcester-class-struggle-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Early Years        College Years        The Sixties        The School System        From the IS to the RSL Wayne Price is a longtime anti-authoritarian political activist. He was drawn toward pacifism and anarchism as a teenager in the 1950s, and he participated in the anti-Vietnam War movement during the 1960s and early 1970s. At the end of the sixties he became a teacher in the New York City public school system, and he remained active in teacher union politics from the seventies through his retirement. In recent years he has helped educate some members of a new generation of radicals through his articles, lectures, and books. He is currently a member of Bronx Climate Justice North, a grassroots climate justice group based in the north Bronx, and the Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council in New York City. Although Wayne Price never abandoned the decentralist and libertarian-socialist ideals he held as a teenager, for more than two decades he participated in a succession of socialist organizations that drew inspiration from the Marxist tradition. In the mid-1960s Price joined the New York City branch of the Independent Socialist Clubs (ISC), which renamed itself the International Socialists (IS) in 1969. He subsequently took part in a factional dispute within the IS that led to the formation of the Revolutionary Socialist League (RSL) in 1973. While the RSL initially described itself as a radical Trotskyist grouping, albeit with a state-capitalist analysis of Soviet-style systems, by the early 1980s the organization started moving in an anarchist direction. The League dissolved in 1988 and fused with other anarchists to form the Love and Rage Anarchist Federation. When Love and Rage disbanded in 1998, Price ended up joining the North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists. Wayne Price is the author of three books: The Abolition of the State: Anarchist and Marxist Perspectives (AuthorHouse, 2007); Anarchism and Socialism: Reformism or Revolution? (Thoughtcrime Ink, 2010); and The Value of Radical Theory: An Anarchist Introduction to Marx’s Critique of Political Economy (AK Press, 2013). He regularly contributes to a number of websites, including anarkismo.net ; anarchistnews.org ; utopianmag.com ; and infoshop.org . A selection of his articles may be found on Anarkismo, at www.anarkismo.net . This interview is based on two conversations that I conducted with Wayne Price in October and November 2018. The conversations were lightly edited by the participants. I would like to express my gratitude to Wayne Price as well as to the editors of AnarchistStudies.Blog. – Kent Worcester Kent Worcester: Why don’t you say something about your childhood? Wayne Price: I had a normal upbringing in the suburbs. I was born in 1946, right after the war, which means that I am a Baby Boomer. My parents moved to the suburbs – Valley Stream on Long Island – just as the area was being built. When I was a kid you could see houses going up almost every day. It was not far from the city. My father was a school teacher. At first my mother was a stay-at-home mom, but she then went to college and first became a guidance counsellor and after that a psychologist. KW: Were they pro-union? WP: Oh yes, my father was very active in the teachers’ union, and they were both friends with former Communists. KW: Were they sympathetic to the Civil Rights Movement? WP: Very much so. They were favorable to the left in general. That doesn’t mean they were politically active – they were very busy with their lives. Later on, they became extremely angry about the Vietnam War. They subscribed to I.F. Stone’s Weekly , but they did not take part in demonstrations. It was nevertheless clear where they stood on things like civil rights and Vietnam. KW: Any siblings? WP: One. I have a brother who is two years younger than me. He never became a radical – he was a musician and he then became a lawyer. KW: Were you politically active in high schoo…
