---
title: "​Doctors and Druggists Among the Early Philadelphia Anarchists"
author: "Robert P. Helms"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-p-helms-doctors-and-druggists-among-the-early-philadelphia-anarchists"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An earlier, much shorter version of this article, “Anarchists in Medicine and Pharmacy: Philadelphia, 1889–1930,” appeared in Clamor Magazine #6 (Dec. 2000/Jan. 2001), and had previously been posted on both the Guinea Pig Zero and Dead Anarchists websites. Retrieved on 15th May 2024 from www.deadana"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "robert-p-helms-doctors-and-druggists-among-the-early-philadelphia-anarchists.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-p-helms-doctors-and-druggists-among-the-early-philadelphia-anarchists.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In the City of Philadelphia in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries, there was a large group of professionals who practiced medicine or pharmacy as a livelihood, while committing great energies to the anarchist movement. Looking past the surface, we find a closely knit community of intellectuals who treated their comrades as patients, educated the public on health related matters, and who contributed substantially to the cause with money or the use of their facilities. A look through the anarchist literature of the period will reveal the names of a remarkable number of doctors, who pioneered many of the debates on social changes that are, by and large, taken for granted today. Among them, the best known is undoubtedly Ben Reitman. He is so noted because he catered to the mainstream Media image of an anarchist by hanging out in saloons and hobo jungles, once carrying on a comic chase scene with detectives through Philadelphia’s department stores, and generally keeping himself in the realm of romantic legend. While Reitman did his share of fighting for positive social change during his career, he was the very least distinguished of the anarchist physicians of his time. Certainly some of his leading contemporaries made this assessment. He was actually more a political performance artist than a doctor. Reitman’s relative prominence is largely due to his personal connection to the very famous Emma Goldman, but even more due to the fact that almost nothing has been written in English about the doctors whose work, both in anarchism and in medicine, simply eclipsed the career of the “hobo king.” [1] Such is not the case in Yiddish, but not so many people use that language these days, nor is it easy to locate the books by and about Jewish anarchist doctors. The major figures already known had careers in New York. They include Hillel Solotaroff, Jacob Abraham Maryson , Michael A. Cohn, and Abel Braslau, all of whom were active in the movement in addition to being respected, practicing physicians. While New York’s anarchist doctors and their contribution to the movement is known and thoroughly documented, their colleagues in Philadelphia have been almost completely forgotten. [2] A central event in the tale of these particular comrades was the shooting of Voltairine de Cleyre by an insane former language student of hers named Herman Helcher. Voltairine was already fairly well-known in the international movement for her many essays and poems that had been published in anarchist and other radical periodicals. Locally, she was one of the two best-known anarchist speakers, along with a self-educated English-born shoemaker named George Brown. She earned a very modest living by giving private lessons in English, French, and Piano. This poor but respected woman was wounded by three revolver shots on December 19, 1902 at the corner of 4 th & Green Streets, as she waited for a trolley car. The early reports had it that Voltairine was doomed. She had been taken to Hahnemann Hospital, where the inside of the anarchist medical world begins to reveal itself. Daniel A. Modell was a 40-year old general practitioner and socialist, as well as de Cleyre’s “family doctor.” Modell lived in her neighborhood (which is where she was shot) and was yet another of her former students. His son David was an anarchist who translated Russian texts into English. Modell rode with her in a horse-drawn police wagon to the hospital, and his presence at the bedside is no surprise, but mentioned along with him was none other than Dr. William Williams Keen, who was at that time one of the leading surgeons in the world. Already revered for having removed a cancerous tumor from the jaw of President Grover Cleveland nine years earlier, Keen in 1902 was co-chair of Surgery at Jefferson Medical College. He had already served as the President of the American Medical Association, and he would later preside for ten years at the American Philosophical Society, then the most disti…
