---
title: "Denazification done right"
author: "Anonymous, Dmitry Petrov, Oleksandr Kolchenko"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-insider-denazification-done-right"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "How Russian anti-fascists and anarchists are battling Putin’s invasion"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-insider-denazification-done-right.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-insider-denazification-done-right.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       «If Putin is brought to heel in this war, it will be a moment of revelation for many Russians» – Ilya, anarchist from Russia        «We’re a mishmash of beliefs, age groups, and subcultures» – Oleksandr Kolchenko, anarchist from Crimea        «We can finally fight Putin’s regime in the open» – Yuri, anarchist from Russia        «Western anti-fascists are helping us with the fund-raising» – Salim, refugee from Donetsk, libertarian socialist Upon attacking Ukraine, Vladimir Putin announced its so-called “denazification” as one of his main goals. While the Kremlin is looking for imaginary Nazis, around 200 Russian anti-fascists and anarchists, who have a broad experience of countering the ultra-right in real life, have sided with Ukraine’s Armed Forces. The Insider spoke to three territorial defense fighters and a supply specialist to find out their motivation for taking up arms on Kyiv’s side and whether there are any Nazis in Ukraine. My name is Ilya. I’m an anarchist living in Ukraine. I left Russia a few years back because of the crackdown on the entire anarchist movement. The rumors of an imminent war started spreading a few months before it began, and Ukrainian anarchists considered all possible options. So when we woke up at five in the morning on February 24 to the news of an airstrike on Kyiv, we began to bring our plan to life. Before that, we only had time for a few drills. Some of us had had the experience of military drills; a few of our fighters participated in the anti-terrorist operation in Donbas <The Insider’s note: the Ukrainian government’s name for its campaign against the Russian-backed armed separatists in Donbas> in 2014–2016. Any paramilitary unit, even one consisting of yesterday’s civilians, must feature a military-type hierarchy and discipline. At the same time, we do our best to promote the culture of democracy, where any commander can become an object of criticism, regardless of their rank. There are no forbidden topics, and we hold regular meetings. However, orders must be followed, and the rules of cohabitation must be observed. I’ve joined the territorial defense forces in the Kyiv Region. There are also individual anarchists and groups fighting within multiple units of the AFU and territorial defense. Our platoon is fifty-strong and counting. The ideology is far from homogeneous: we have Arsenal football fans <The Insider’s note: Arsenal was a Kyiv-based association football club popular with Ukrainian anti-fascists. It ceased to exist in 2019> , anti-fascists, and anarchists. Thanks to that, we get to recruit people from different circles. We’ve got Ukrainians, Russians, Belarusians, and people from further abroad. The national composition is split 50–50 between Ukrainians and foreign nationals. We don’t advertise our anarchist beliefs. We’re simply yet another territorial defense unit. That said, we aren’t trying to conceal them either. I have a diagonal red-and-black flag in my room, for instance, and we don’t take it down when our superiors come to inspect us. Territorial defense fighters don’t interact with civilians much, but we have civilian volunteers cooking for us in the mess hall. They are rather cheerful-looking; of course, everyone can’t wait for the war to end, but they don’t look depressed or subdued. Now that the failure of Putin’s blitzkrieg is obvious, people harbor hopes of restoring justice. Territorial defense forces get firearms and ammunition, but not much apart from that. Anarchists from abroad have been a massive help, raising considerable amounts to buy us vehicles and quality equipment. You can only run around in a fur coat with an assault rifle for so long. Fighters need a variety of equipment: helmets, armored vests, tactical vests, everything up to torches and collimator sights. All these items are costly, but territorial defense fighters get no funding from the Armed Forces. I’d like to thank the Anarchist Black Cross Dresden and Operation Solidarity, a chari…
