---
title: "Dispatch from Ecuador"
author: "Prairie Struggle"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/prairie-struggle-dispatch-from-ecuador"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Prairie Struggle members reporting in"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "prairie-struggle-dispatch-from-ecuador.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/prairie-struggle-dispatch-from-ecuador.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       “PIMP MY RAINFOREST” (A.R.)        ANARCHISTS ARE THE ENEMY I have been living in the Andean mountains of Ecuador for about eight months. I live just outside the city of Azogues, about twenty minutes away from the city of Cuenca, which is an incredibly metropolitan city of about half a million people. I have also had the privilege of travelling the country, to the ocean city of Salinas, to Guayaquil (the largest city in Ecuador and center of business), to Quito (the capital of Ecuador), and many places in between. I think I was unprepared for how beautiful a mega-biodiverse country as small as Ecuador truly is. I also tried to arrive in this country with as few preconceived notions as possible, while at the same time researching as much as I could before arriving. The purpose of this article is not to crap on Ecuador, a country I have come to love, nor to purvey that I speak for the people of Ecuador, because that’s not the case either. I want to dispel the idea that political leftism is more prominent here in South America than in the North. Of course, president Rafael Correa does belong to an alliance in South America of ‘leftist leaders’, but after living here for almost a year, I’m just not sure what that means – aside from the rhetoric used to piss off the United States in particular. Now, to be sure, immense progress has been made in Ecuador in a relatively short period of time. If you want to give yourself nightmares for a month, Google “Ecuador and Chevron” to see how this oil company nearly destroyed a country, not to mention one of the most important rainforests in the world. About 20 years ago, people were still leaving Ecuador in droves, culminating in the currency being so devalued that Ecuador switched to the U.S. dollar. My partner, a citizen of Ecuador, remembers a large piece of tear-inducing graffiti in the central plaza of our city, reading “last person to leave, please turn out the lights”. This has changed immensely. Infrastructure has improved by leaps and bounds, creating a lot of jobs. For example, from our location it used to take fifteen to eighteen hours to drive to the capital of Quito; it now takes only six to eight hours. The abject poverty that was a reality for so many, has also improved drastically. The road stops that were manned by either corrupt police looking for bribes, or just straight-up thieves in uniforms, are now abandoned. Many of these changes are a result of president Correa’s policies. However, one need only to travel outside the areas of tourism and U.N. World Heritage Sites to see how the working poor still suffer. As with the rest of the world, these improvements have widened the gap between the wealthy and the working class. In Guayaquil, the center of business in Ecuador, the poverty is stark and in your face no matter which part of the city you are in. In the capital of Quito, the disparity between the classes is marked by disturbing differences. Once you leave the areas marked by the glittering temples of consumerism, government, and tourism you will see that the roads in the neighbourhoods of the poor are not even paved. Will this change as improvements continue? Only time will tell; certainly many of the statements made by Correa are encouraging. He speaks often and specifically of ending discrimination against the marginalized communities of Ecuador; of being firmly against American imperialism; of protecting the environment; and improving the lives of all the citizens of Ecuador. It’s just that a lot of Correa’s recent actions are so damn scary. When I say recent, I’m talking in my time living here. It’s incredibly difficult to take the good stuff seriously when the president’s actions are so bizarrely the opposite. Let’s look at a couple of examples of what is happening in Ecuador under president Correa, and see if we can’t infuse some reality into the preconceived notions of institutionalized leftism we in the North seem to hold about the South. In 2007, presid…
