---
title: "Considerations on Nihilism"
author: "Guerre au Paradis"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/guerre-au-paradis-considerations-on-nihilism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Guerre au Paradis N°1, that you can download here: http://www.non-fides.fr/GuerreAuParadis1.pdf Other english translations from this french anarchist journal can be found on Storm Heaven: http://stormheaven.wordpress.com http://guerreauparadis.blogspot.com Retrieved on November 2, 2010 from sto"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "guerre-au-paradis-considerations-on-nihilism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/guerre-au-paradis-considerations-on-nihilism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We would have preferred not to feel the need to write these lines. We would rather speak of love, of freedom and fresh water, leaving aside the negative, at least for a moment. However: a spectre haunts the revolutionary tension, the spectre of nihilism. Not the “classical” nihilism, represented by Nechaev and his like of the 19 th century. Though maybe we can detect similarities, see a continuity between the old and the new manifestations of this attitude. It is known that each miserable epoch produces its batch of miserable behaviours, which reproduce it in turn. Reactionary epochs, epochs where the revolutionary perspective finds itself nearly completely smothered beneath an enormous ideological morass, asphyxiated in the midst of the political desert. Sometimes this desert is animated by the sad celebrations of the democratic masses, ecstatic to live in the best of all possible worlds, rushing off to the nightclubs to consume their alienation in the form of alcohol and cocaine, spiritedly discussing the tragic possibilities: Bayrou or Cohn-Bendit in the next electoral cluster-fuck, the latest Top 40 hits [1] , what to think of the Grenelle de l’environnement [2] , sealing themselves up in their cell phone or iPod so as not to be too in touch with their fellows, winding their way through the tons of merchandise, both accessible and untouchable. A multitude of mechanisms that democracy knew to develop to forge the citizen from nothingness: from student parties to the days against... war, domestic violence, climate change, world hunger, GMOs and so on, from television and advertising propaganda to the free journals distributed en masse to massively annihilate minds, from 50-euro internships in non-violent civil disobedience to the penitentiary administration recruitment campaigns, from People magazine to the latest gaming system’s hot new shoot-em-up that feels “like Gaza”, we find again this same carefree bonhomie, this same satisfaction, the forced smiles, this repugnant “fun attitude” [3] face-to-face with the social emptiness in which we are immersed, the same frightful impression of living in an almost incredible age, where the positivist religion will be enough to erase the ambient misery. On one hand, mass welfare, lay-offs by the shovelful, generalized poverty and precarity, increasingly common and powerful wage slavery exploitation, total lack of perspective, despair and resignation, occasional rage. On the other, the mob of clowns and citizens always ready to tell you it’s much worse in Bangladesh and that we have to know how to make do with what we’ve been given, and to continue to flounder joyously in the swamp of survival. And that even if times are tough, at least here there is peace and security. When the nihilists of the 19 th century threw their bombs into crowds, they were acting from the expression of a pure negativity, from a radical and global refusal of society, anxiously awaiting the end times, the end of the world, of making a definite end to a life devoid of sense. There was something to destroy. More precisely: everything was to be destroyed. Today the nihilism produced by the democratic spectacle and by democratic indifference has many meanings, different types of expression. On one hand, one feels that the world is not coming to an end, despite the relative success of various versions of ‘catastrophism’; that on the contrary it is working to hold on, to accompany the permanent changes of the system that rules it, to adapt itself somehow to the epoch and its norms, to follow the tendencies which create the illusion of renewal, of an illusory change. In short, to paint the grey of daily domestication a bright, fluorescent yellow. What is at stake is the sustainable development of domination in all its aspects. All means seem to be good for use to this end, and the saddest part of the business is to note that the cops are not the principal tool of this politics, which knows how to craftily wed a syste…
