---
title: "Antiindividualistic Individuality"
author: "Gabriel Kuhn"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gabriel-kuhn-antiindividualistic-individuality-anarchisms-legacy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Anarchism’s Legacy"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gabriel-kuhn-antiindividualistic-individuality-anarchisms-legacy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gabriel-kuhn-antiindividualistic-individuality-anarchisms-legacy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Preface to this Edition        Antiindividualistic Individuality: Anarchism’s Legacy        About the author This text is an English translation of the key chapter of a thesis I wrote in German as a philosophy student in the early 1990s. At the time, I tried to align anarchist beliefs with postmodern/poststructuralist theory and cultural studies. Not long thereafter, I lost interest in these pursuits. Today, I’m baffled by the nonsense that has been produced (and continuous to be produced) under the “post” banner. However, I still believe that the theorists who inspired these fields (often against their will) made valuable contributions to the history of ideas and intervened at a time when social sciences and humanities needed a breath of fresh air. The thesis in question was called Jenseits von Staat und Individuum. Studien zu alteritärer Individualität (Beyond the State and the Individual: Studies on Alternative Individuality). In 2007, a revised version with a less pretentious subtitle (Individuality and Autonomous Politics) was published by Unrast Verlag. I have, at times, called this my most underrated book. That’s tongue-in-cheek, but even if there has been an appreciative audience, it has always remained limited. I believe, though, that the book targets a problem that has only grown since then, namely: how are politics based on collective values possible in an individualized world? Especially, when we, the “subjective forces” of the revolution, have a hard time escaping our own individualization as well. The issue is very personal, as my political beliefs revolve around mutual aid and communal efforts, while I find alone time and personal independence very precious. Is this a contradiction that can be resolved? Are there ways to reconcile these apparent opposites? Or are our collective aspirations doomed? In Jenseits von Staat und Individuum , these questions were mainly discussed with references to popular culture, everything from literary classics to Italo Westerns to straight edge. Yet, the chapter “Das Vermächtnis des Anarchismus: Skizze einer antiindividualistischen Individualität” (The Legacy of Anarchism: Sketching an Antiindividualistic Individuality) tried to tackle them theoretically. In 2003, I translated this chapter into English and published it as a pamphlet under the title “Antiindivdualistic Individuality: A Concept” in the Alpine Anarchist series. Alpine Anarchist Productions was a DIY publishing project I ran at the time. As with most Alpine Anarchist releases, I used a pseudonym for this pamphlet: Teoman Gee, the most common one. In 2007, I stopped releasing pamphlets and moved Alpine Anarchist Productions online. While I uploaded a fair number of the pamphlets I had released, I never uploaded “Antiindividualistic Individuality”, because I was unhappy with parts of the translation. It was therefore a very pleasant surprise when, in July 2023, the editors of Laniakea Books got in touch and expressed interest in rereleasing the pamphlet. This goes to show that even pamphlets released in very small numbers can have long-lasting effects. (Shout out to all the zine makers out there who still stick to the trade!) So, I gave the translation an overhaul and handed it to the Laniakea folks to produce the booklet you’re holding in your hands (or peruse online). There are features that you wouldn’t find in current texts of mine (quite a bit of the wording and neverending notes!), but I didn’t change any of that. The document stands for its time. Many thanks for the opportunity to see it in print again! — Gabriel Kuhn, Stockholm, August 2023 “The new man will find himself only when the warfare between the collective and the individual ceases. Then we shall see the human type in its fullness and splendor.” — Henry Miller, The Time of the Assassins There can be no critique of the prevailing bourgeois-capitalist ideology without a critique of modern individualism. For it is modern individualism that leads us …
