---
title: "Capital Offences"
author: "Jeff Shantz"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-shantz-capital-offences-excusing-suite-crimes-and-elite-deviance"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Excusing Suite Crimes and Elite Deviance"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jeff-shantz-capital-offences-excusing-suite-crimes-and-elite-deviance.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jeff-shantz-capital-offences-excusing-suite-crimes-and-elite-deviance.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Excusing Elite Crimes        Conclusion With the Conservative government in Canada pushing its omnibus crime bill which targets street crimes of the working classes for harsher punishment it is critical to address the more serious suite crimes carried out by economic and political elites which are not only routinely overlooked but actually supported by the same governments that prattle on about “public safety.” Perpetrators of corporate deviance, who profit from unsafe working conditions for their employees, the release of dangerous toxins into the air and water, the sale of faulty products and fraudulent business practices among other acts, present ongoing economic, social and physical threats. Yet those responsible for such activities rarely appear in the media or court records. They receive far less attention than deviant youth whose actions may be much less harmful. The crimes of major corporations, where they are given attention are typically dealt with through less visible and less punitive civil procedures rather than criminal trials. While school crime and deviance undertaken by working class youth become the subjects of moral panics and policing and have relatively large amounts of social resources directed towards stopping the offending behavior, corporate crimes receive relatively little media focus, public outcry or legislative response. One might well question why it is that the waters are being drugged with harmful chemicals yet attention is directed towards arresting youth for minor drug offences, including strictly personal use. There is a pressing need to shift focus from street crimes to the crimes that are hatched planned in the executive suites and corporate head offices. If we define crime as avoidable misconduct that causes unnecessary harm or damage to society, then it is clear that much of the activities engaged by economic and political elites could and should be considered criminal. White collar and corporate crimes, such as selling unsafe products, unhealthy workplaces, pollution, fraud, and bribery, cause far greater and farther reaching public harm than do more visible street crimes. The result is hundreds of deaths and hundreds of thousands of injuries every year, only a portion of which are even reported. Typically, however, these activities are not constructed as crime. Elite deviance is normalized and elites are provided a range of excuses by which their activities are obscured or reconstructed as something other than criminal or deviant acts. The reconstruction of elite crimes and deviance as normal, acceptable, or even legitimate parts of “the costs of doing business” or “business as usual” is an effect of power. It is part of the process of hegemony, the construction of elite interests as the common good, and the manufacture of consent. Elite crime and deviance rarely results in criminal labeling. This is true even where corporate actions lead to massive and wide ranging harms, as in mining disasters or factory fires. There is usually no prosecution and rarely any jail time. The first ideological trick by which elite deviance is normalized and excused is the notion of profit. Using the term profit to describe what is actually a theft, the theft of surplus value, excuses a massive transfer of wealth upward, out of working class communities and into private control for the benefit of capital. In this way the enormous day to day looting of wealth is rendered acceptable. What is called profit is really exploitation. It should be identified as such. Imagine if in place of the term profit the term exploitation was used in public discussions and debates. This would shift the way society viewed the issue. If on the news a report that said the profits of national companies was up reported instead that exploitation by national companies was up, or theft by national companies was up, people would respond much differently. At the very least the conversation should start by calling it what it real…
