---
title: "What are the global effects of anarchist lifestyle choices?"
author: "J Levy"
date: "2017"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/j-levy-community-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "unknown"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "j-levy-community-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/j-levy-community-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Lifestyle Anarchism Revisited        Small Communities of Liberation        The Global and Local Dichotomy        Conclusion        Bibliography The idea that ‘Another World is Possible’ [1] is a vital motivational force behind most anarchist lifestyles. Despite some claims of individualism, some anarchist lifestyle choices embody a communal approach that seeks to instantiate this ‘other world’ in direct opposition to the individualistic lifestyles that embody the spirit of capitalism. Grassroots activisms, in the form of “small communities of liberation” (Clark 2004:70), are a case in point. In this essay I will briefly revisit the meaning of lifestyle anarchism and argue that some intentional communities with an ecological ideology prefigure an alternative. I will then flip the notion of what is global on its head and argue that examples of anarchist prefiguration have real potential to transform the structural nature of capitalism as any local action is itself linked to, and enacted upon, the global stage. Bookchin (1995) argued that merely living an anarchist lifestyle does little to address the structural oppression of capitalism. Bookchin constructed a dichotomy between the social and personal and saw personal or lifestyle choices as an indulgence afforded to the privileged whose focus was purely on “personal improvement, personal achievement, and personal enlightenment” (1995:7). When an anarchist lifestyle constitutes these emphases then it is easy to sympathize with Bookchin’s disdain. Whilst I am in agreement with Bookchin that there is little potential for political change through self-realization alone [2] , his narrow, binary evaluation of lifestyle / social anarchism has been sufficiently challenged with rational arguments elsewhere (Clark 2008; Davis 2010; Wilson 2014a). Suffice to say that the personal must also be political to be anarchistic, a theme I will return to later. Anarchism is a code of ethics, reaching toward a multispecies, biocentric ontology. It is a verb, a relational way of being in the world based on egalitarian values of mutual aid, co-operation, community, equality, equity, collective stewardship of resources, and the respect for diversity [3] . Furthermore, what constitutes a lifestyle, is a complex system of relationships that include consumption habits, language, ideologies and the general behavior and habits of individuals and sub-cultures (Clark 2008; Portwood-Stacer 2013; Wilson 2014a). Invoking Foucault’s (1991; 1998; Rabinow 1991) concept of power and discipline (power is not just exercised from the top down but also throughout society by individuals and groups within that society) infers that lifestyle choices contain agency. If this agency is exercised using disciplinary techniques embodied in anarchism then this could, in time, begin to break down global capitalist structures through the creation of “new logics, habits, spaces”. (Wilson 2014b: 4). A multitude of resistant and innovative cultures enacted on a local, grassroots level, a hollowing out of the system from within ( ibid ). Whilst Bookchin’s own philosophy makes immeasurable contributions to potential alternative ways to organize the world politically, it still fails to provide an answer to the question of ‘where does one begin’? If capitalism relies upon growth, fuelled by competition for its survival then surely one legitimate way to resist capitalism is to engage in a lifestyle that limits its contribution to capitalism. One way to instantiate this kind of lifestyle is to transform our social relationships so that they become reliant upon co-operation as opposed to competition through monetary economics. For this transformation to be as close to egalitarian principles as possible it has to begin at the smallest unit of agency and its equal relationships to all other units of the same size i.e. the individual and its relationship to other individuals. As these relationships are never fixed the concept of prefigu…
