---
title: "Fear First Nests in Our Souls and Then Raises the Walls of Its Prisons"
author: "Conspiracy of Cells of Fire"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/conspiracy-of-cells-of-fire-fear-first-nests-in-our-souls-and-then-raises-the-walls-of-its-pris"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Inter Arma interarma.info"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "conspiracy-of-cells-of-fire-fear-first-nests-in-our-souls-and-then-raises-the-walls-of-its-pris.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/conspiracy-of-cells-of-fire-fear-first-nests-in-our-souls-and-then-raises-the-walls-of-its-pris.epub"
    hosted: false
---

         I. Propaganda becomes practice          II. The isolation of oblivion          III. Power loves to divide          IV. From theory to action          V. For a… New Atlantis A provocation… The flight of Christodoulos Ksiros from prison and his return to the armed struggle. Many lies… The tv monologue, which describes how things inside prison are, making them look like a movie. “Terrorists who run things in prison…” “The members of CCF are bossing prison guards around” “Terrorists celebrate new year’s Eve and plan a prison escape.” The enemy… The contruction of a prison inside prison codenamed “maximum security prison, type C”. A truth… All of the world’s locks are not enough to imprison our unfaltering decision to remain enemies of authority until the end… In recent months, journalists, as owners of the only truth, following the commands of authority, created a teriffying atmosphere. A television script of “truth”, that talked about “bloodthirsty terrorists” and which was enriched with a provocative bounty of four million euros for every aspiring snitch, who would contribute to the arrest of the wanted persons. Behind that ommunicative tide of lies, the truth of repression made its appearance. Propaganda is followed by action… The police campaign started with dozens of evasions in the houses of comrades and other individuals of the anarchist movement. At the same time, the terror hysteria had already thrived and the time was right to test the proposition of staritng thr first Greek Guandanamo. A Guandanamo, which authority firstly seeks to apply in Domokos prison, then in every prison and then everywhere, in the streets, in the city squares, into the people’s brains and souls. Because that is the target, indeed. The fascist former judge, who runs the Ministry of Justice already pulls the strings, gaining the consent or even the applause of the tv public. The maximum security prison doesn’t only mean more bars and thicker cement, which hides the sun. It is not only a legal poison that murders slowly and steadily the life of prisoners. It is an experiment of amnesia. A scientific procedure, in order for the prisoners to forget and to be forgotten. The increase of the limit of jail time, the ban of permits, the sensory isolation by removing and reducing human contact with our loved ones aim to make us forget there is life. A life that goes beyond the walls of the prison yard. At the same time they are burrying us in maximum security cement tombs, they seek us to be defeated by oblivion. More specifically, they want to lock the experience of the armed guerilla, to disconnect it from reality and to delete it, both as history and as an experience. Whatever is being forgotten, is doomed to die… On March 27, 2014, prisoner Ilia Kareli was murdered , a few days after he stabbed a prison guard. Kareli was beaten to death by cops and prison guards. He is not the first and will not be the last one who gets released inside a coffin. His case just couldn’t be hidden behind excuses and lies. Because everybody knows that prison, in its own way, is the kingdom of death. Death runs the prison, sometimes in a slow everyday manner through psychotropics and drugs and the blank pages of the diary and some other times in the form of bureaucratic statistics, lack of medical staff and dead-ends inside four walls. At the same time fear runs the prisons with division as its partner. The punishment of the maximum security prisons divides the prisoners. There are the insubordinate-dangerous prisoners and the obedient ones, the “good” ones, the willing collaborators of the wardens and of the prosecutor. This is not something new, but now it is official. The draft bill about the maximum security prisons is clear. A prisoner that will help with information to prevent “terrorist actions” or the arrest of “terrorists” enjoys the state’s petting namely he is being released and included in a witness protection program. The poison of suspicion runs throug…
