---
title: "Brennan’s Spanish Labyrinth"
author: "Marie Louise Berneri"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/marie-louise-berneri-brennan-s-spanish-labyrinth"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "MARIE LOUISE BERNERI was an editor of War Commentary and later Freedom, until her death at the age of 31 in 1949. She was the author of Journey Through Utopia (Routledge) and Neither East Nor West (Freedom Press). Her article was originally written for Now in 1944 as a review of the original edition"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "marie-louise-berneri-brennan-s-spanish-labyrinth.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/marie-louise-berneri-brennan-s-spanish-labyrinth.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Books about Spain have been written either by learned professors who write history ignoring completely working class movements and the existence of the class struggle and who therefore put fanciful interpreta- tions on events they are unable to understand, or by journalists who feel qualified to write about Spain after spending only a few days or a few weeks in the country and without having acquired any previous knowledge of the historical background of the people. Such books sometimes contain brilliant passages, like Borkenau’s Spanish Cockpit or George Orwell’s Homage to Catalonia, but are also full of inexacti- tudes and hasty generalisations. They are also often written with a bias to suit the political fashion of the moment Several books were written about the Spanish revolution which did not mention the work of the Anarchist movement or even its existence. On the other hand, because it is popular to boost the Communists, most of the work done during the revolution was attributed to them. The Spanish Labyrinth* stands apart from all these books, both for the erudition which the author displays and for his objective approach to the subject. Gerald Brenan did not use any expedient method to write this book. He has taken great pains to find the truth and to be fair to all the parties he deals with, and if sometimes the book contains inaccuracies one feels that they are due to misinformation rather than to political prejudice. Brenan’s book is made interesting and penetrating by his sympathy for the subject he has treated. He loves Spain and the Spaniards and has a particular understanding of the Spanish peasants among whom he lived so long, not as a tourist but as one of them, sharing their houses* their food, their talk, their songs and dances. An historian should attempt to experience in imagination the feelings and reactions of the people he describes, and he is able to do this only if he can, so to speak, put himself in their place. Brenan is extremely gifted in that respect. He has dealt with his subject not only as a scholar but also as an artist and a psychologist. This has enabled him to understand actions which* not being a revolutionary himself, he cannot approve, such as the burning of churches, the throwing of bombs, the killing of priests, the expropriation of landlords and many other acts of revolt of the Spanish workers. He sees these facts in their right perspective and makes fun of the reactionaries who, at the slightest movement of revolt among the masses, are prepared to see the whole working class as a mob of criminals. He effectively debunks atrocity stories, a task which, unfor- tunately, historians are not often willing to undertake, particularly when these stories are used to discredit national or class enemies. Brenan says that already in 1873 the most infamous stories were circu- lated against the Anarchists. The Carlists, who were the equivalent of the Fascists of to-day, issued two pseudo-anarchist papers to give more weight to their atrocity stories. The front page of one of them, Los Descamisados (The Shirtless), bore the following battle cry : 900,000 heads! Let us tear the vault of heaven as though it were a paper roof! Property is theft! Complete, utter social equality! Free Love! After the Asturian rising of October 1934 accusations of atrocities were again circulated on a big scale against the revolutionary workers. Brenan says : The most incredible tales were solemnly told and vouched for. The nuns at Oyiedo were said to have been raped: the eyes of twenty children of the police at Trubia were said to have been put out: priests, monks and children had been burnt alive: whilst the priest of Suma de Lagreo was declared to have been murdered and his body hung on a hook with the notice “Pig’s meat sold here” suspended over it. Although the mose careful search by independent journalists and Radical deputies — members that is, of the party then in power — revealed no trace of any of these horro…
