---
title: "the doctrine of discovery"
author: "Rob los Ricos"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rob-los-ricos-the-doctrine-of-discovery"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "establishment of the rule of law in the land of liberty"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rob-los-ricos-the-doctrine-of-discovery.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rob-los-ricos-the-doctrine-of-discovery.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A few notes about this alleged “progress” of his(story) ROMANUS PONTIFEX, JANUARY 8, 1455 – the doctrine of discovery “ [W]e bestow suitable favors and special graces on those Catholic kings and princes …intrepid champions of the Christian faith…to invade, search out, capture, vanquish, and subdue all Saracens and pagans whatsoever, and other enemies of Christ wheresoever placed, and…to reduce their persons to perpetual slavery, and to apply and appropriate…possessions, and goods, and to convert them to…their use and profit…“ There you have it, spelt out in fairly clear language – His Excellency, Pope Babyraper the Umpteenth, authorized his co-conspirators to go out and rob, murder, rape, and plunder in every land which had not been “saved” by J-Zeus, the dying/resurrecting sun deity. At the time of the edict, that was around 80 percent of the inhabited world. It’s easy enough to dismiss this document as an out-dated relic of a long-gone era. The problem with that is, this is the SINGLE, LEGAL DOCUMENT that created the court systems of the US, Canada, Australia, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Philippines, most of Africa, swaths of Asia… This single document is cited by the US Supreme Court when considering matters of copyright, property, regulation of corporations, and trade agreements. Yeah, all that bullshit about separation of Church and State…just window dressing. Without this Roman Catholic doctrine, the foundation for rule of law by the court systems in just about every nation on earth goes straight out the window. Ever heard of a place called Latin America? No one spoke fucking Latin in the god-damn 14th century. Except for the Catholic Church clergy and Lawyers, who established the court systems that preside over these places to this day. That’s why it’s referred to as Latin America, because of their Latin legal systems. Think this is a ridiculous over-simplification (I get that a lot)? Ever read a US law book? See all the Latin phrases? When exactly was it that Latin-speaking people inhabited the US? Isn’t US law supposed to be based on English court systems? And just what is the foundation of English law? Again, written in Latin. (Little known fact – “Empress of the Holy Roman Empire” was one of Queen Lizzie the 2nd’s titles.) INTER CAETERA, MAY 3, 1493 “ …in our times especially the Catholic faith and the Christian religion be exalted and everywhere increased and spread…and that barbarous nations be overthrown…” This Papal decree is so much a part of the Great American Mythology that it was referenced by US Chief Justice John Marshall in an 1823 decision, JOHNSON v. MCINTOSH, 21 US 543 to assert American authority over Indigenous Peoples. His decision legalized exploitation, theft, and genocide by establishing that Indigenous Peoples were indeed not quite people, not being Christians and all, so anything done to or against them is all good and well, and the Good Lord’s work to boot – hallelujah! This decision has never been overturned (see “American Indian Sovereignty: Now You See It, Now You Don’t” https://people.umass.edu/derrico/nowyouseeit.html). And why should it be overturned? It’s necessary to dehumanize Indigenous Peoples in order to rob, rape, and murder them wholesale, even over the objections of the more squeamish members of the invading societies. This notion that Indigenous Peoples must be “saved” from their ignorant, savage existence by having the gifts of religion and poverty bestowed upon them fuels wars even in the 21st century. This idea has been enacted through many expressions over the years: saving souls, bringing them civilization, educating them, making them into citizens of the state. This is the doctrine of Manifest Destiny – that god almighty has given Europeans superior weapons in order to subjugate other Peoples. Most of whom were not warlike, and almost none of whom had standing armies. This is the notion of Progress. Lands previously untouched by the foul hand of the West h…
