---
title: "Application for the Suard Pension"
author: "Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pierre-joseph-proudhon-application-for-the-suard-pension"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Shawn P. Wilbur, 2017. Retrieved on 02 December, 2018 from https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/working-translations/p-j-proudhon-application-for-the-suard-pension-1837-2/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "pierre-joseph-proudhon-application-for-the-suard-pension.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pierre-joseph-proudhon-application-for-the-suard-pension.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Besançon, May 31, 1837. PIERRE-JOSEPH PROUDHON, CANDIDATE FOR THE SUARD PENSION TO THE GENTLEMEN OF THE ACADÉMIE DE BESANCON. Gentlemen, I am a compositor and proofreader, son of a poor craftsman who, as the father of three boys, could never bear the cost of three apprenticeships. I knew misfortune and trouble early; my youth, to use a very popular expression, was passed through a fine sieve. Just so Suard, Marmontel, and a host of writers and scholars struggled with fortune. May you, gentlemen, upon reading this memoir, have the thought that between so many men famous for the gifts of intelligence, and the one who now seeks your votes, the community of misfortune is perhaps not the only point of resemblance. First destined to a mechanical profession, I was, on the advice of a friend of my father, placed as a free day student at the Collège de Besançon. But what was the payment of 120 francs for a family where food and clothing was always a problem? I usually lacked the most necessary books; I did all my Latin studies without a dictionary; after having translated into Latin everything that my memory supplied, I left blank the words that I didn’t know, and, at the door of the school, I filled the empty spaces. I was punished a hundred times for having forgotten my books, but the fact was that I did not have them. All my days off were filled with labor, either in the fields or in the house, in order to save a day's work; on holidays, I went to the woods myself to seek the stock of hoops that would supply the shop of my father, a cooper by profession. What studies could I make with such a method? What meager success I was able to obtain! At the end of my ninth year [quatrième], my prize was Fenelon’s Démonstration de l’existence de Dieu . That book seemed to suddenly open my mind and illuminate my thought. I had heard talk of materialists and atheists: I was anxious to learn how they went about denying God. I will admit, however, that Descartes' philosophy, embellished with Fénelon's eloquence, did not entirely satisfy me. I sensed God, and my soul was permeated with him; captured from childhood by that great idea, it boiled over in me and dominated all my faculties. And in a book written to prove the existence of the Supreme Being, I only encountered a rickety metaphysics, the deductions of which had the appearance of a more practical hypothesis, but did not resemble a certain, scientific theory. Allow me, Gentlemen, to offer you an example. The soul cannot perish, say the Cartesians, because it is immaterial and simple. But why can something which has begun to be not cease to exist? What then? Is the soul, in its duration, infinite and eternal on one side but limited on the other? This is inconceivable. — Matter, say the same philosophers, is not the necessary Being, because it is obviously contingent, dependent and passive. So it has been created. But how are we to conceive of the creation of matter by mind, rather than the production of mind by matter? One is a inconceivable as the other. So I remained what I was, a believer in God and the immortality of the soul, but, begging philosophy's pardon, this was less because of the evidence of its syllogisms than the weakness of the opposing arguments. It seemed to me from then on that another path was necessary to establish philosophy as science, and I never returned to that opinion of my youth. I pursued my classics through my family's miseries and all the degradations with which a sensitive young man with the most irritable self-esteem can be deluged. Apart from illness and the bad state of his business, my father pursued a lawsuit that completed his ruin. The very day when the judgment was to be pronounced, I was to be awarded with excellence. I arrived with a very sad heart at that formal occasion where everyone seemed to laugh at me; fathers and mothers embraced their laureate sons and applauded their triumphs, while my family was in court, awaiting the decision. I will alway…
