---
title: "Clinton and the taming of Haiti"
author: "Jose Antonio Gutiérrez Danton"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-clinton-and-the-taming-of-haiti"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A white smile is not always a sign of friendship"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-clinton-and-the-taming-of-haiti.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-clinton-and-the-taming-of-haiti.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Clinton and the return of the makoutes to power in Ayiti (1993–1994)        Clinton and the return of pirates to the Caribbean        Ayiti and the reestablishment of US hegemony in the hemisphere “Jan ou vini se jan an yo resevwa ou” (Your approach will determine your welcome. Aysien Proverb) On the 19 th of May, Ban Ki Moon, secretary general of the UN, appointed ex US president Bill Clinton as United Nations special envoy to Haiti [1] . His Mission: “to help mobilise resources for the reconstruction of the country, devastated by natural disasters and the food crisis, among other problems” [2] . At the beginning of September, Clinton and the Tunisian head of MINUSTAH, Hédi Annaba, having “reminded” us in quite a paternalistic way that the Haitians are perfectly capable, intelligent and creative people (they were only short of adding “almost like the rest of us”), they told us that the misery, oppression and violence that reign in the Caribbean nation are due to: “it having suffered bad governments, abuse and neglect, not only from inside the country, but also from its neighbours and from the international community. We currently have a great team of leaders in Haiti, we can turn the situation around. And since we can, we must do it” [3] . This confession is surprising in that, for the first time, as far as I know at least, a leader of the “international community” has recognised, even though it was just in passing, that the international community has something to do with the poverty and hardship suffered in Ayití [4] (Haiti). And we can gather from his declarations that there has been some sort of relationship between the abusive and negligent Haitian leadership, and this international community. Coming from somebody like Clinton, this declaration should not be taken lightly and it should refresh our memories regarding the role that Clinton himself has played in relation to the abuses suffered for so long by the Ayisien [5] people and which he himself doesn’t seem to remember. “Ipokrit se kouto de bò” (Hypocrites are a double-edged sword. Ayisien Proverb) With his appointment in May as the all new special envoy of the general secretary of the UN in Haiti, it wasn’t the first time that Clinton posed as a “friend” of the Haitian people. The first time he did it was 15 years ago when one of the most ferocious dictatorships ever to have plagued Haiti, that of Raoul Cedras, had violently come to power. Let’s refresh our memories a bit. In September 1991, after seven months in power, father Jean Bertrand Aristide, priest, follower of Liberation Theology and leader of one of the biggest popular movements in recent Haitian history, forged in the struggle against the Duvalier dictatorship, was overthrown by a CIA financed coup d’état with unofficial approval from the White House (unofficial, because, with the end of the Cold War and the inauguration of the New World Order, the image of the supposed “guardian of democracy” could not be sullied) [7] . During his 1993 presidential campaign, Clinton criticised Bush’s policies towards Haiti, his soft touch approach to the makoutes and his not unequivocally recognising the legitimacy of the ousted Aristide. Clinton was particularly fierce in his criticism of Bush’s policy of repatriating Haitian rafters at a time when the makoutes killed a total of 5000 people, mutilating, torturing and raping many thousands more. Among his promises were to halt the repatriation of Ayisiens who had defied the odds in flimsy rafts to seek asylum in Florida and to fulfil the international obligations of the US in terms of guaranteeing political asylum to refugees, to take drastic measures in order to return Arisitide to power and to toughen the embargo on Haiti [8] (an embargo that Chomsky defined as the most porous embargo of all times, a mere “public relations” stunt by the US without any intention of putting real pressure on the makoutes [9] ). More than a few Ayisiens swallowed the bait (includin…
