---
title: "The Freedom to Succeed"
author: "Deirdre Hogan"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/deirdre-hogan-the-freedom-to-succeed"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Anarchist Collectives in the Countryside during the Spanish Civil War"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "deirdre-hogan-the-freedom-to-succeed.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/deirdre-hogan-the-freedom-to-succeed.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The organisational structure and power structure of the collectives        Day to day life        The role of women in the collectives        How the “individualists” were treated        The Freedom to Succeed Many people, upon hearing about Anarchism, consider a society based on anarchist principles as unrealistic, idealistic and naive — the vision of dreamers. Given the homogenous view of the world represented in the media, it is often difficult for people to imagine a society where such universally accepted institutions as the state, the judiciary system, the police, armies, and nations no longer exist. For a glimpse of how such a society would function it is useful to look to the social revolution that took place in Spain in 1936, when, over a period of two years, people took power into their own hands and started to construct a completely different society based on anarchist principles. Anarchist ideas had been gaining strength in Spain since the second half of the 19 th century. The CNT, an anarcho-syndicalist trade union, was formed in 1910, and by 1936 was very powerful, having a membership of 1.5 million. By that time anarchist ideas were strong in the minds of the peasants. In fact, collectivisation had actually started in some areas of the countryside before the revolution. On July 17 th a military coup took place in Spanish Morocco which spread the next day to the peninsula. In the cities and villages the workers organised themselves to defeat the military uprising and thanks to their courage and initiative the fascist revolt was stopped in three-quarters of Spain. These people however were fighting not only to crush the fascist attempt to seize power, they were also fighting for a new social order in Spain. As soon as the fascists were defeated, workers’ militias were set up independent of the state. The factories in the cities were taken over by the workers, and in the rural areas the lands of the fleeing fascists and fascist sympathisers were taken over. In the rural parts of the Republican zone, under the influence of CNT and FAI (Federation of Iberian Anarchists) members, collectivisation was the most far reaching. Usually it was the members of the CNT or the FAI who called general meetings in the villages and pushed for collectivisation. At these meetings people voluntarily pooled whatever land, tools and cattle they possessed. To this was added whatever land had been expropriated from the large land owners. “People who had nothing to bring to the collective were admitted with the same rights and duties as the rest”. [1] Soon almost two-thirds of all the land in the area controlled by anti-fascist forces was taken over and collectivised. In all between five and seven million people were involved. The smallest unit of each collective was the work group, usually numbering five to ten members, but sometimes more. Everyone in a collective, where possible, was obliged to work. “The collective was the free community of labour of the villagers.....The group might consist of friends, or the neighbours on a certain street, or a group of small farmers, tenant farmers, or day labourers.” [2] Each group was assigned land by the collective and they were then responsible for the cultivation of this land. Within each work group a delegate was elected who, while working alongside her comrades most of the time, also represented the views of her group at the meetings of the collective. In some collectives there was an Administrative Commission which met with the delegates from each work group and drew up the work plan for the next day. The Administrative Commission or management committee was responsible for the day to day running of the collective. “They would look after the buying of materials, exchanges with other areas, distributing the produce and necessary public works such as the building of schools”. [3] Members of the management committee were elected at general assemblies of all participants of the collective.…
