---
title: "Creaghe's Speech at the Sheffield Police Court"
author: "John Creaghe"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-creaghe-creaghe-s-speech-at-the-sheffield-police-court"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Original Title: Creaghe, John, 'Creaghe’s Speech at the Sheffield Police Court', in Commonweal, Vol. 7, No. 274, (London, 1891) pp. 85-6 Retrieved on 14 August from https://www.marxists.org/history/international/social-democracy/commonweal/1890/index.htm"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-creaghe-creaghe-s-speech-at-the-sheffield-police-court.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-creaghe-creaghe-s-speech-at-the-sheffield-police-court.epub"
    hosted: false
---

As our readers may be interested in Comrade Creaghe's "trial for libel" at Sheffield, we quote his plucky speech in the police court, which we have taken from the report of the Sheffield Evening Telegraph and Star: Our Comrade said: “I wish to make a statement about the matter and leave it for you to decide whether you wish to dismiss it here. I think it was absurd that a number of people should have to come together and have to occupy their time and attention on such a trumpery charge as this man Wilson has thought fit to bring against me. However, knowing as I do with what trivialities lawyers and law courts are obliged to occupy themselves, being, as they are supposed to be, engaged in trying to accomplish the impossible, that is to say, to judge other men's conduct and mete out justice - I say supposed to be, for I know that to mete out even-handed justice is not really their intention.” “But if it were so, it would be a thing quite impossible. Still, many believe such is their object, and from what I have seen, and from what I have heard, the best judges of the matter - the working men - the men sitting in the court would do justice if they could. I have it, I say, from the best judges in the matter, because the men of the working classes form the immense majority of those who come before the courts to have their conduct tried, and this is a significant fact, which might make some people think, and leave them to understand what the real object of so-called justice is. But it is impossible for any man, or any crowd of men, to judge another's conduct. They cannot possibly enter into all the circumstances that surround a man, which have surrounded him from his birth, and which make him so very largely what he is.” “They cannot even say weeks or months, or even hours, after an affair has occurred, give a right understanding of the birth of any matter surrounded as it is with insurmountable difficulties. They try to lay down hard and fast rules, leaving out all those considerations I have mentioned without which justice could not be done, and which they also find it impossible to judge of, and therefore abandon all attempts to take into consideration.” “No, the real object of law and authority is to protect private property, and this can be seen in this case, in which I am threatened with the tremendous penalty of two years' imprisonment, not because my accusers have suffered by what I have written, for if a man be pure and unstained as this Wilson says he is nothing that another can say to the contrary would have any other result than bringing out more clearly the truth; and if he were guilty he would only have to grin and bear it.” “But I am accused because any accusation of crime is supposed to injure a man's interests, his hope of making money, his property, which in this case consists in his privilege as one of a limited number, allowed to plead in courts and to tax the public in accordance with that privilege. If one law more than another could be considered a rich man's law this would be one. For look at the penalty, and see how closely it is associated with property, and then look at the penalty for personal injury. Compared with it, why, if I had thrashed him for his insults within an inch of his life, I would have been perfectly justified in doing so.” Mr. Fairburn (Wilson's solicitor): “If you could.” Creaghe: “Silence, sir. I would not have incurred anything like the same punishment, and yet a personal assault on a man is by all mankind. considered to be the worst offence you can do him. The honourable man may overlook much that may be said or written, but a blow or buffet is in most countries in the world only to be wiped out with blood. But in any case, in any way you look at the matter, what injury has been done to this man. I say nothing whatever; for I say, without fear of contradiction, that he belongs to a profession, one of the wretched results of private property, whose business is to lie, and cheat, and s…
