---
title: "Accomplices Not Allies"
author: "Indigenous Action"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/indigenous-action-accomplices-not-allies"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Abolishing the Ally Industrial Complex; An Indigenous perspective & provocation"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "indigenous-action-accomplices-not-allies.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/indigenous-action-accomplices-not-allies.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Accomplices not allies.        Consider the following to be a guide for identifying points of intervention against the ally industrial complex.          “Salvation aka Missionary Work & Self Therapy”          “Exploitation & Co-optation”          “Self proclaiming/confessional Allies”          “Parachuters”          “Academics, & Intellectuals”          “Gatekeepers”          “Navigators & Floaters”          “Acts of Resignation”        Suggestions for some ways forward for anti-colonial accomplices        If you are wondering whether to get involved with or to support an organization This provocation is intended to intervene in some of the current tensions around solidarity/support work as the current trajectories are counter-liberatory from my perspective. Special thanks to DS in Phoenix for convos that lead to this ‘zine and all those who provided comments/questions/disagreements. Don’t construe this as being for “white young middle class allies”, just for paid activists, non-profits, or as a friend said, “downwardly-mobile anarchists or students.” There are many so-called “allies” in the migrant rights struggle who support “comprehensive immigration reform” which furthers militarization of Indigenous lands. The ally industrial complex has been established by activists whose careers depend on the “issues” they work to address. These nonprofit capitalists advance their careers off the struggles they ostensibly support. They often work in the guise of “grassroots” or “community-based” and are not necessarily tied to any organization. They build organizational or individual capacity and power, establishing themselves comfortably among the top ranks in their hierarchy of oppression as they strive to become the ally “champions” of the most oppressed. While the exploitation of solidarity and support is nothing new, the commodification and exploitation of allyship is a growing trend in the activism industry. Anyone who concerns themselves with anti-oppression struggles and collective liberation has at some point either participated in workshops, read ‘zines, or been parts of deep discussions on how to be a “good” ally. You can now pay hundreds of dollars to go to esoteric institutes for an allyship certificate in anti-oppression. You can go through workshops and receive an allyship badge. In order to commodify struggle it must first be objectified. This is exhibited in how “issues” are “framed” & “branded.” Where struggle is commodity, allyship is currency. Ally has also become an identity, disembodied from any real mutual understanding of support. The term ally has been rendered ineffective and meaningless. ac·com·plice noun: accomplice ; plural noun: accomplices a person who helps another commit a crime. There exists a fiercely unrelenting desire to achieve total liberation, with the land and, together. At some point there is a “we”, and we most likely will have to work together. This means, at the least, formulating mutual understandings that are not entirely antagonistic, otherwise we may find ourselves, our desires, and our struggles, to be incompatible. There are certain understandings that may not be negotiable. There are contradictions that we must come to terms with and certainly we will do this on our own terms. But we need to know who has our backs, or more appropriately: who is with us, at our sides? The risks of an ally who provides support or solidarity (usually on a temporary basis) in a fight are much different than that of an accomplice. When we fight back or forward, together, becoming complicit in a struggle towards liberation, we are accomplices. Abolishing allyship can occur through the criminalization of support and solidarity. While the strategies and tactics of asserting (or abolishing depending on your view) social power and political power may be diverse, there are some hard lessons that could bear not replicating. Allies all too often carry romantic notions of oppressed folks they wish to “help.” …
