---
title: "The Anarchist's Guide to Critical Thinking"
author: "The Peer Review"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-anarchist-s-guide-to-critical-thinking"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Issue #1 of The Peer Review zine."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-anarchist-s-guide-to-critical-thinking.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-anarchist-s-guide-to-critical-thinking.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       First things first          What is critical thinking…          …and why should you give a fuck?          Here’s the plan        Part I          Evidence          Heuristics, Biases, and Fallacies        Part II          Applications          Content          Sequence          Revisit        Sources Some writers and philosophers have approach defining it broad strokes: Robert Ennis, who spent six decades writing about the topic, claimed that critical thinking is simply “reasonable reflective thinking that is focused on deciding what to believe or do.” (1991, p. 8). Similarly, Sharon Bailin and her colleagues identified only three characteristics that make thinking critical: (1) it is done to determine what to believe about something; (2) the thinker is trying to meet some standards of adequacy in their thinking; and (3) the thinker does meet those standards to an appropriate degree (1999). Others have focused more specifically on critical thinking as applied to argumentation. Mark Battersby, for example, defines it as “the ability and inclination to assess claims and arguments” (2016, p. 7), and stresses the importance of evaluating evidence to expose false claims. Regardless of whether the definition is generic or specific, though, most writers agree that critical thinking is a habit that requires practice to master. Far from a bourgeois ideology, critical thinking is a necessary tool for anarchists. Anarchism demands that individuals be able to think accurately and effectively. From being able to spot exploitative power structures to understanding the minutiae of alternative economic theories, anarchism is far more than just tossing pipe bombs at cop cars. Even the most aware anarchist is in danger of falling for misinformation, conspiracy theories, and cults of personality—and before you think you’re immune, remember that you have identical brain structures to the people who fall for it all the time. To avoid those traps, anarchists need to be able to think for themselves. When done right, critical thinking is a necessary step in the path to liberated, individual thinking. There’s a longstanding debate about whether critical thinking skills are generalizable (in that there is a single skillset that applies to all areas of inquiry) or if it’s domain-specific (in that each discipline—math, science, history, philosophy, etc.—has its own set of critical thinking skills). I’m choosing to split the difference. In Part One , we’ll address two generalizable skills: first, we’ll discuss evidence gathering and assessment, and second, we’ll talk about heuristics, biases, and fallacies. In Part Two , I’ll present a guide to critical thinking specifically designed for anarchists, based on Daniel Willingham’s 2019 paper “How to Teach Critical Thinking.” Willingham outlines four steps that should be taken when teaching critical thinking about any topic: first, identify what “critical thinking” means in that domain; second, identify the knowledge that is necessary for each understanding of critical thinking; third, create a sequence in which that knowledge should be learned; and fourth, revisit and relearn. With that, let’s get started. When assessing any proposition, argument, or problem, a good thing to ask is: how good is the evidence? Every argument requires evidence: if someone were to claim that leprechauns are real, we shouldn’t take their claims at face value. Rather, we should ask for the proof. After that, we should assess if the evidence they provide is adequate. In his book Is That a Fact? Mark Battersby divides the assessment process into two steps. First, ask if the evidence supports the determination. He uses the example of a letter to the editor published in Time , in which the author claims that her “85-year-old mother power-walks two miles each day, drives her car (safely), climbs stairs, does crosswords, reads the daily paper and could probably beat [your columnist] at almost anything.” Thus, so the writer believe…
