---
title: "Economy That Proved Disastrous"
author: "Lizzie M. Holmes"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lizzie-m-holmes-economy-that-proved-disastrous"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The American Federationist 8, no. 11 (November 1901): 471–472. Retrieved on 27th May 2023 from www.libertarian-labyrinth.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lizzie-m-holmes-economy-that-proved-disastrous.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lizzie-m-holmes-economy-that-proved-disastrous.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Once upon a time a pleasant, busy little manufacturing town stood on the banks of a swiftly flowing river. It seemed a happy and prosperous village, for the small cottages of the workers were neat and surrounded by flowers and trees. The windows were tastefully draped with muslin or lace curtains. In the evenings the tones of singers, mingling with the sound of organ and violin, floated out on the peaceful air. The young people dressed well and took an active part in the literary societies, socials and parties, where a gentle emulation existed as to who could furnish the best entertainment. There were churches, schools, libraries and lecture rooms, in which all took considerable pride. Of coarse, there was a “great man” of the town—a man whom every one believed in and revered. He was one of the largest shareholders of one of the best business enterprises of the town, a fine furniture factory. He was known to be well educated and liberal in his views; was not a hard master, and paid as good wages as prevailed anywhere. But he had a hobby. He preached economy in season and out of season. He was always telling the people of the town how he had risen to his present comfortable position by strict economy and thrift. He had been left an orphan when a little boy, had blacked boots and sold papers. His first regular job was to sweep out the office of a large manufacturer, who took some interest in him. He earned $1.50 a week at first, and saved a part of it; then he earned $3, and saved more. He finally went into the shop and earned $6, then $9, then $12, and continued to save in proportion to his earnings. At twenty-one he had money out at interest, and in two or three years more he owned houses to rent. He was foreman for several years; then at last bought a small establishment and superintended his own work. He made a good profit on his goods, lent money at excellent rates, and made his houses pay well. When he reached the point where money came by these three methods of “getting something for nothing”—rent, profit and interest—his wealth accumulated very rapidly. All along his course he never spent a cent that was unnecessary. He did not dress shabbily, and it is supposed that he had enough to eat. He believed that a man could not succeed without an education, and so secured a fairly good one. Now he owned thousands of dollars’ worth of property, posed as a man of influence, and possessed a good yearly income, even though he should not choose to do a stroke of work. “See what steady industry and economy had done for me!” he would say. Every one of his “hands” might follow his example and rise as he had done, if they worked hard and saved. They must learn to deny themselves the many useless expenditures in which they were wont to indulge. After all, men needed very little to keep them healthy and in condition to work, so why spend money for other things? Economy was his watchword. He would lecture every group of his employes whenever he came upon them, and pose before them as an example of what it could accomplish. His words had a great deal of influence upon his audiences. So it came about, that if a child yielded to the temptation to buy a stick of bright colored candy, he did so guiltily and ran away if he saw “old Mr. Blatchford” coming. If a poor woman, starved in her love of the beautiful, bought a pretty ribbon, she hid it under her shawl and told no one of it. If a man on a hot day indulged in a glass of beer, he did so furtively, and felt like a burglar as he sneaked away wiping his mouth. If a little girl got a new cheap doll, she covered it with her apron if she saw Mr. Blatchford coming down the street. A young woman who had worked in the factory ever since she was a little girl, seemed to be the only one uninfluenced by the great man’s admonitions. She was engaged to a young man who worked in another department, Frank Towne by name. They had bought a little home on payments and were furnishing it little at a time. She …
