---
title: "A Call to Arms"
author: "APS"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/aps-a-call-to-arms"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-05-03 from bandilangitim.noblogs.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "aps-a-call-to-arms.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/aps-a-call-to-arms.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I.        II.        III.        IV. We are a circle of friends who have come to a realization that the world as it is has not only failed us but is also actively antagonistic towards Art as a form of individual expression and oppressive towards the Soul as the sum total of human experiences. We have come to a consensus that this toxic state of affairs is not the product of an individual, nor even a group of individuals, but a byproduct of how our society is organized. There are three main things which we consider to be the cause: The Tyranny of the State on Society With their monopoly on violence by means of the military and the police, our so called “representatives” and politicians are able to prop up their own agendas and maintain the power structures that benefit them. By this same method, they are able to take parts of the natural world and claim it as the property of the State, and interfere in the personal and public lives of the people it claims as its own. What was once the right of the community to decide for itself what is best for themselves, is now forced upon them by “elected officials” chosen from the existing ruling elite. Those that do not conform to the State are branded outlaws and are often violently oppressed, leading to unnecessary bloodshed. Not to mention the power struggles that States love to take part in, especially in partnership with — The Tyranny of Private Property and Capitalism on the Physical World Private property, protected from “theft” by the violence of the State, keeps the means of production of society’s needs in the hands of a handful of people, who benefit from the labor of the many. The products of this labor is then sold for a greater price than it cost to produce it. This means that in order to gain profits, it needs to pay the workers less than the value they created. And because the success of businesses of any scale is determined by profits, it must continue extracting, producing and distributing their products or services to their markets regardless of the actual need for them. This leads to the continued pillaging of nature that causes the horrors of climate change that we have only just begun to see the effects of. Another consequence of this quest for the most profit is the elevation of competition from being a consequence of conflict to a virtue. They misinterpret Darwin in that this will always lead to better products and ways of producing them, as if profit is related to quality at all. Competition as virtue, as well as the workers not owning the means to earn a living, results in a very visceral feeling of alienation from others, one’s work and their own potential as a person. The Tyranny of the Spectacle upon the Mind and The Mental World Put simply, the Spectacle is the sum total of all social relation mediated by images. All that was once lived directly, is now consumed by spectators, keeping the downtrodden and oppressed complacent while under the thumb of the capitalist and the watchful eye of the State. It comes with pre-packaged identities that serve to only further legitimize the existence of the ruling class and divide the people along racial, gender, and religious lines, as well as according to the media they consume. This results in the masses competing against each other as opposed to uniting under a single cause to overthrow the existing order. The Spectacle deals in images, both real and metaphorical. We recognize Patriarchy, for example, as a system of images that people are reduced down to and are forced to conform to. Deviance from the roles and images the Spectacle has given a person will be isolated further, and in many cases, come to personal harm. This is only one out of many, all of which must be dealt with if we are to truly build a society built on freedom, equity and solidarity. Against these systemic tyrannies we, at a personal level, do our best confront their manifestations and educate the people around us. At a larger scale, we push ef…
