---
title: "Against the Legalization of Occupied Spaces"
author: "Wolfi Landstreicher, Barocchio Occupato, El Paso Occupato"
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/el-paso-occupato-barocchio-occupato-against-the-legalization-of-occupied-spaces"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Venomous Butterfly Retrieved on January 12, 2013 from http://zinedistro.org/zines/87/against-the-legalization-of-occupied-spaces/by/el-paso-occupato-and-barocchio-occupato"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "el-paso-occupato-barocchio-occupato-against-the-legalization-of-occupied-spaces.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/el-paso-occupato-barocchio-occupato-against-the-legalization-of-occupied-spaces.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Translator’s Introduction        Introduction: Live Free or Die        Self-Organization:        Self-Organization Enclosed Dies        Direct Action        The Label of Self-Organization        Spectacularization        Legalization in Foreign Countries        The Political Responsibility of those Who Desire Legalization The text translated here first appeared in 1995 as a pamphlet addressed to the occupied spaces and social centers in Italy by two anarchist occupied spaces. In the few years previous to this, a movement aimed at the legalization of certain occupied spaces sprang up, largely centered around the Milanese social center Leoncavallo (now well-known as one of the places from which Ya Basta! And the Tute Blanche originated). From the start, this movement for legalization involved not merely negotiation with the state institutions, but the formation of alliances with specific parties of the official left. That the first social centers to involve themselves in this movement were part of the Autonomia reveals the purely instrumental nature of their decentralism and “autonomy”. The legalized social centers are now all camp followers of one or another of the Left parties. In this text, the authors first set forth their own basis for choosing to carry out occupations and then examine the implications of the legalization movement in terms of the recent history of squatting in Europe and in terms of the effects of negotiation and compromise with the institutions of domination on the project of self-organization and more particularly on those spaces that refuse legalization, compromise and negotiation with power. One may ask with some reason what purpose the translation of such a text might have. The circumstances in Italy and throughout the rest of Europe differ significantly from circumstance in the United States. The sort of public and openly antagonistic occupations that happened throughout Europe have been very rare here, the squatting movement in the Lower East Side of New York City being the most obvious example. It is certainly not my aim to try to promote a mindless imitation of European or specifically Italian occupations. This would be neither possible nor desirable. Rather what I find interesting in this text, and what I consider worthy of discussion by anarchists in the United States, is the conception of self-organization (or self-determination) [The Italian word autogestione is most often translated “self-management”, but within the American anarchist milieu this term usually refers to the management of enterprises by their workers, an idea far too small for the vision expressed here. The vision here is of the autonomous creation of the totality of existence and thus of a life and world without enterprises — without separated spheres of productivity and thus without the social relationship of work. Therefore, I have chosen to use the more general terms “self-organization” and “self-determination” in my translation.] expressed by the writers of this text, a conception that makes it very clear that a project that relies for its existence upon institutions, upon the structures of power, cannot truly be called “self-organized”. They furthermore make a clear distinction between projects of revolutionary self-determination, which are anti-political because they spring from the desires of those who create the projects, and radical political projects. Since politics is, in fact, an art of compromise and negotiation, those who carry out such projects will place efficiency above desire and at some point or another probably negotiate with those in power, seeking their place in the political framework. But those who base their projects on their desire to create the whole of their existence on their own terms against all domination will necessarily refuse such compromise and negotiation, avoiding talking with the ruling forces in any way except under duress. The conceptions of self-organization and the nature of ana…
