---
title: "Anarchy"
author: "Theodor Plievier"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theodor-plievier-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on February 22, 2025 from https://anarchistischebibliothek.org/library/theodor-plievier-anarchie"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "theodor-plievier-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theodor-plievier-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In the direction of the flaming dawn, over the expanse of Slavic fields and steppes, over the Russia of the Soviets, the land of Lenin, Trotsky and the millions and millions of primitive, natural people, from the midst of hard-fisted, uncultured peasants and workers, from the womb of a barbarically healthy, future-pregnant national body: from the primal power grown into the earth, the last day of old Europe rises, the end of a world era dawns. The mighty explosion of the national spirit that had come of age had blasted the Tsar’s throne, this violent and arbitrary rule of Russian decadence over the broad masses of the people. Eighteen moons later, war-weary soldiers overthrew the German empire. And under the calculating tables of the French capitalist regime, under the skull-towered slave throne of world-ruling Old England, Bolshevik tinder smolders. The communist waves that run from east to west, that rise above opposing reactionary blocs in mighty cascades of foam, that flare up into prophetic lightning in the Hungarian Soviet, in the proclamation of the Soviet Republic in Bavaria, in political strikes in England and Germany, in rallies of French socialists and in street fights in Italian cities, these storm waves of communism roar the death knell of old Europe — and the witness prelude to a new world epoch. The extreme peaks of socialism announce the end of the old era; Spartacists and Bolsheviks drum up the death whirlwind for it. They are the last consequence of the materialistic epoch: the primal power of broken-away slaves against the violence of the oppressors, violence against violence — a doubly murderous wrestling match — the end. Spartacism and Bolshevism are the fires that burn up the old order, but fires that consume themselves in the process. To be a Spartacist means to destroy — but also to destroy yourself. The clash of capitalism with socialism has the aggressive, feverish, senseless, suicidal nature of the act of witnessing. Capitalism and socialism, these most powerful currents, these most fully grown children of the materialistic world epoch, give birth to the new age in a mighty embrace, in the discharge of highly tense contradictions. Capitalism and socialism are the opposite poles of a slave system; the world of modernity hangs within their boundaries: factories roar, wage slaves toil, palaces are built, people die in ditches, church bells ring, soldiers commit murder and arson, Jews on the stock exchange haggle, people starve, demonstrations of worn-out workers erupt. These opposing elements push, push, rub, heat, ignite each other, and raise the world to a raging fever. The contact of extremes, the clash of the most extreme cultural peaks, causes the world to explode — the world revolution. In the flaring fires of the coming upheavals, the cultural globe “capital-labor” is shattered, the world of masters and servants is atomized. And the primal melody of eternal renewal resounds stronger and more definitely through the brains of the European masses. It is the belief in the self, the primal religion of humanity rising from the depths of personal life: individualism. Stock companies, trusts, armies, naval fleets, churches, municipalities, states are shattered by the battle-hardened will of conscious individuals. Only rubble and remnants remain of the proud organizations of matter: the chaos of a new “Let there be light!” Communism is the watchword of the present. Solidarity, socialization, protection of the weak are the dazzling slogans, the crystallization nuclei that gather ever larger, ever more powerful masses of people around them. The time of soulless mechanics and technology, the age of the rule of matter over the spirit, is celebrating its greatest triumph. The flat spirit of the herd rules and determines all details of public life. Mass instincts are the dictators of this period of decline of the capitalist world epoch... ...of decline, because the downfall of this world epoch is near. Communis…
