---
title: "Down with the Empire! Up with the Spring!"
author: "Do or Die"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/do-or-die-down-with-the-empire-up-with-the-spring"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An article from Do or Die Issue 10. In the paper edition, this article appears on page(s) 1–101. Retrieved on September 27, 2010 from www.eco-action.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "do-or-die-down-with-the-empire-up-with-the-spring.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/do-or-die-down-with-the-empire-up-with-the-spring.epub"
    hosted: false
---

   Part One: Recent Pre-History      An Insurgency of Dreams      The Rise of Environmentalism      The Birth of Earth First!      EF! Crosses the Atlantic      EF! Birth Period (1991–1993)        Roads, Rebels and Rainforests        The Camps Begin...        From the Ashes... Twyford Rising!        Not Single Issues, Just One War      Land Struggle Period (1993–1998)        Welcome to the Autonomous Zones        Progress, Yuck — Time to Go Back to the Trees        Hunting the Machines        There is no Justice, Just Us!        A Street Reclaimed        Back on the Farm        Whatley Quarry — Yee Ha!        “An Adrenaline Junkie’s Idea of Heaven”        After Defeats, Victories!        Fly, Fly into the Streets!        National Actions        A Shift from the Local to the Global      Consolidation and Global Resistance Period (1998–2002)        Tribal Gatherings        Local Consolidation and Outreach        On the Streets, In the Fields        The Struggle is Global, The Struggle is Local        Guerrilla Gardening        Channel Hopping        International Solidarity        Then and Now      Appendix        Friend or FoE?        Utter Contempt for the Court    Part Two: The Four Tasks        A Small Editorial Note      I: Growing Counter-Cultures        Map Reading in the Social Desert        Expand the Cultural Oases          The Spanish Anarchist Counter-Society          30 Years of Temporary Counter-Cultures          Opening Up Space          Changing Change        Counter (R)evolution        Surplus Baggage        Some Proposals          Reconnecting with each Other          Reconnecting with the Land        Task Conclusion: Grow and Live      II Putting Our Thumb in the Dam        Here Come the End Days          Biological Meltdown          Cultural Meltdown          A Critical Moment        Defending the Living Land          The Hottest of the Hot          The Top Nine Hotspots          The Remaining 15 Hotspots          Defending the Land: Medium Term Global Objectives          Back to Britain, Back to Reality          Defending the Land: Immediate British Objectives        Defending the Living Sea          Defending the Living Sea: Medium Term Objectives        Defending Living Culture          Defending Living Culture: Immediate Objectives        Task Conclusion: Warriors for the Earth      III Preparing for Crises        The Myth of Stability          The Living Earth in Crisis          The Megamachine in Crisis          The Flesh in Crisis        Crisis Breeds Change        Hope for the Best — Prepare For the Worst        Visualise Industrial Collapse        Counter-(R)evolution? — We should be so lucky (lucky, lucky, lucky)        Task Conclusion: Don’t Call Up Blood      IV Supporting Rebellion Beyond the Core        Solidarity is also a Weapon        Direct Cash Aid to Struggling Communities          1) Money for Community Health and Survival          2) Money for Refugee Camps          3) Money for Prisoners          4) Money for Agitation and Propaganda        Travelling to and Joining their Struggle          On-the-Ground Solidarity Work with Specialist Practical Skills          On the Ground Solidarity Work NOT with Specialist Practical Skills        Hosting Majority World Radicals        Supporting Prisoners        Solidarity Actions          The Clouds are Gathering?        Immigrant Communities Within ‘Rome’        Luddite Attacks on Evolving Elite Technology        Smashing Up the Spectacle, Spectacularly!        Task Conclusion: There is No Rosy Picture      Conclusion: Fires in the Night          Be the Spark      Appendix        Love’s Labours Lost        The Mediterranean Hotspot          Flagship Species          Threats          The Mediterranean Red Alert Areas          Conservation        Some (Don’t) Like it Hot(spot)        (Counter) Revolutionary Rainy Day Reads        11.9.2001        Peasants and the Transitional Class          The Panthers — Militants of a Transitional Class        It’s…
