---
title: "Domestic Violence and Social Work from an Anarchist Perspective"
author: "C. Inza DeBoise"
date: "2011"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/c-inza-deboise-domestic-violence-and-social-work-from-an-anarchist-perspective"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 1 January 2011 from www.anarcha.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "c-inza-deboise-domestic-violence-and-social-work-from-an-anarchist-perspective.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/c-inza-deboise-domestic-violence-and-social-work-from-an-anarchist-perspective.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Katie was a physically fit 30yr old mother of two toddlers when she decided to leave her abusive partner of many years. Never having seeked help due to the isolation she faced in their rural lakeside cabin, she did not know that the most violent attacks from intimate partners are brought on by the victim’s decision to separate (or, curiously, by the announcement of a pregnancy). As she loaded her children into their car, (she had made a secret set of keys the last time she had gone for groceries), her man went for the semi-automatic weapon he had kept and intimidated her with when she spoke of leaving. Katie was stepping into the driver’s seat when he unloaded the gun into her. He then sped away in his truck, leaving her for dead. Katie and her children arrived at the women’s shelter after several months in various medical facilities. Help had come for Katie, but not in time to save her left leg, which was completely destroyed by the shots sustained. Katie was lucky to have her life. The statistics read like a war zone. 30% to 80% of women in emergency rooms are there due to domestic violence, or “intimate partner violence” as it’s sometimes called. 50% of women homicide victims in NYC are killed by intimate partners. Teenagers comprise almost 10% of those victims. Feminists believe these statistics quite low, stating that many boyfriends and husbands don’t get caught or that the crime goes unsolved, or the woman remains “missing” (disappeared). Deaths due to DV (domestic violence) are comparable to those by drunk drivers in some areas. The NYC domestic violence hotline receives about 8,000 calls a month. The NYC Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence project serves over 500 victims of DV a year. Each year about 700,000 people are stalked by intimate partners or ex-partners in the United States. This includes 10% of female college students. These statistics are from the NYC mayor’s office and Sanctuary for Families, all available on the Internet. I’ve worked as a domestic violence counselor for about six years now. I do this work from an anarcha-feminist perspective. That means that I have a political analysis of DV. This sets me apart from other “social workers”, surprisingly because the vast majority of whom don’t even identify as liberal feminists. In order to maintain a society as rigidly hierarchical as ours, the threat to women’s physical and mental safety must be maintained. Especially if we dare to challenge the authority of patriarchy. Disabling women is a very efficient way to maintain the hierarchy complex since women comprise over half of all people, a “minority” that is actually a majority, the trump card. The most obvious level of sexism is that which disallows freedom minded women space in the public media or in any political position that promises power, as well as the overtly sexist policies of our government. On a more localized level, there is a gradient of mechanisms used to oppress including denied access to an education that is honest about women, access to health care, to the resources that influence the democratic process, to the validation of rape as a crime, and to abortion as a right. On a familial level, we see physical, sexual, emotional, financial, and spiritual abuse. All of these mechanisms of oppression are upheld by deep seeded, often undetectable ideas about women as inferior, animalistic, weak, and disposable beings. The most devastating level of sexism is that which culminates as an assault on a woman’s body and mind by her most intimate partner. Since women are not by nature masochistic subservients, and will reach out for help, the success of this level of sexism is dependent on the complicity of the community. In my experience, many social workers are at the forefront of that complicity, engaged in a betrayal as they claim to be trying to make the world a better place. Most social workers, case managers, and other administers of public benefits hold an inordinate amount of power over women seekin…
