---
title: "Albania: Laboratory of Subversion"
author: "Alfredo M. Bonanno, Anonymous"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-albania-laboratory-of-subversion"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Jean Weir in collaboration with John Moore and Leigh Starcross Retrieved on 29th May 2006 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-albania-laboratory-of-subversion.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-albania-laboratory-of-subversion.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       INTRODUCTION        INSURRECTION AND COUNTER-INSURRECTION IN ALBANIA (Chronology January — August 1997)          January          February          March          April          May          June          July          August        ALBANIA, LABORATORY OF SUBVERSION          From one capitalism to the other          The mask of democracy          The intelligence of the revolt          Where did it spring from?          When looking on is not enough        A look at Italian investments in Albania In Albania, just two years ago, a sudden explosion of popular rage eloquently demonstrated that the state only persists thanks to the gracious complicity of its subjects. When this complicity ends,structures that appeared invincible disintegrate overnight... Incontestable in its spontaneous and destructive extension, the insurrection in course has taken everyone by surprise. Not least the men and structures of power When such a profoundly subversive movement surges forth and spreads, the instability and precariousness of State order becomes quite evident. Suddenly appearing at various points it spreads like an oil stain and, fruit of so many contradictions, cannot be stopped as some good people maintain with simply a few well-aimed gunshots. People find it hard to grasp what is taking place in a world where everything has become uncertain. Will they be able to take a bus? Find a post office open? Get to work (anyone who has a job)? Continue to wait patiently in the food queue at the door of some church? Anarchists are also taken by surprise. They are elsewhere, spread throughout the world, busy going into theories or distinguishing themselves from each other on the basis of metaphysical levels of reciprocal impurity. So they have other things to think about. Insurrection is knocking at the door but they are deaf to it, slow to act. And, being not exception the the rule, the incredible Albanian insurrection is full of surprises. With one difference. Power knows what needs to be done at the international level. The insurgents also know what to do, at least at the immediate level. After all, for anyone with any sense doing something is the first thing that comes to mind when they find themselves faced with an unforeseen event, whether it gives rise to fear or opens one’s heart to the greatest of hopes. But really knowing what to do is not so easy. Although not quite immediate, Power’s response at both local and international level has been that of defend mg its own interests. Knowing that it will have to give up its position sooner or later, the ruling party is doing everything to put that off for as long as possible, so that their strategic retreat can become a starting point for a mass return to the seats they had to abandon. At the international level the gendarmes’ boss, the US, has decided it will be the nations most directly interested in the future economic development of Albania to see to things this time: Italy, Greece and Turkey. Italy, which has always played a role in Albania’s ignoble past history, has accepted this task willingly, perhaps for no other reason than to get an opportunity flex its muscles. First, by sinking a ship full of people and drowning them without batting an eyelid; then running the cruiser that was the pride of the navy aground and leaving it stranded on the beach, crammed full of refugees who were trying to leave the country. These blunders aside, police operations are a routine for any government, and that is what this has become. Bosses of every kind, from the small proprietor of a hat factory who paid “his” workers a fifth of what he would have done in Italy; to the great administrators of the world economy (with the never sufficiently lauded Bank of Rome in the lead), have shared the money rashly invested by the Albanians over the two years between themselves. But let’s take a closer look at this money that so much has been said about. Through its international intermediaries, in the first p…
