---
title: "Egypt’s Black Bloc"
author: "Goos Hofstee"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/goos-hofstee-egypt-s-black-bloc"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Arrival of Anarchism in the Middle East?"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "goos-hofstee-egypt-s-black-bloc.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/goos-hofstee-egypt-s-black-bloc.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A Long History of Anarchism and Anti-Authoritarian Activism        The Labor Movement, Egyptian Nationalism, and British Occupation        Far From a Historical Novelty        Ideology or Tactical Pragmatism?        Fight Against Hegemony The Egyptian Black Bloc is not the first example of anarchism in Egypt. When in January 2013, Egyptian protesters commemorated the two-year anniversary of Hosni Mubarak’s ouster, a mysterious group emerged in Cairo. Protesting against the Morsi regime, the newly-formed anarchist “Black Bloc” openly declared they would not eschew violence to realize their goals. Using slogans, including “our mess prevents chaos” and “we are confusion that prevents confusion,” their protests prompted a violent crackdown by the Egyptian regime, and an excited reaction from anarchist groups abroad. When we look at coverage of the Black Bloc in the “anarchist blogosphere,” the dominant tone is one of celebration. When the Black Bloc first appeared, the jubilant blogs quickly stressed the connection between Egyptian revolutionaries and Western anarchist movements such as Occupy. Moreover, the emergence of the Black Bloc was hailed as the “arrival of anarchism in the Middle East.” The blogs — and, to a lesser extent, some of the mainstream press — give us the impression that the Black Bloc is Egypt’s first-ever encounter with anarchism and anti-authoritarianism. This is, however, far from true. While it is certainly less documented than anarchist history in the West, the Middle East — and Egypt in particular — has a long history of anarchism and anti-authoritarian activism. Anarchism in the region started as early as the 1860s when Italian political refugees and dissidents arrived in Alexandria and other Egyptian cities, where they found the political climate to be less repressive. Soon, the new immigrant communities were flourishing. The newcomers became increasingly active in domestic politics, set up workers’ unions, and influenced the burgeoning Egyptian labor movements with anti-authoritarian ideas. Much of these immigrants’ version of anarchism — and specifically anarcho-syndicalism, which focuses on labor struggles through self-organization — was about fighting the corrupted regime and improving the lives of ordinary Egyptians. These ideas found fertile soil with Egyptian workers. In 1894, Greek workers organized a strike with Egyptians laborers against the Suez Canal Company. This strike was characterized by an unprecedented degree of unity between foreign and indigenous activists, which resulted from a convergence of the immigrant workers’ political radicalism and Egyptian workers’ nationalist sympathies. This anti-authoritarian activism of the increasingly powerful workers’ unions inevitably led to more state repression of anarchists, while several foreign activists were deported. However, it also led to more public sympathy for these revolutionaries, whom many Egyptians understood to be fighting a corrupt regime on behalf of the average Egyptian citizen. The workers’ activism went hand in hand with an upsurge in Egyptian nationalism. While the latter was an Egyptian ideology by nature, the immigrant anarchists supported the nationalist cause and became actively involved. It was this entwinement of the labor movement and the nationalist ideology that worried the British, and that led General Allenby to comment in July 1919 that: “The foreign and native working classes have apparently identified in their own minds the Syndicalist (that is trade union) movement, and the Extremist (that is the nationalist agitation).” Even though the British granted Egypt official independence in 1923, their military occupation of Egypt lasted until 1936. However, the 1919 national revolution against the British had opened the floodgates of labor organization, nationalist activism, and anti-authoritarian action. For years to come, anarchist activists kept targeting foreign powers repeatedly, and their militant actions …
