---
title: "Anarchism and Christianity"
author: "Sebastian Kalicha"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sebastian-kalicha-anarchism-and-christianity"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Plea for a differentiated view"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sebastian-kalicha-anarchism-and-christianity.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sebastian-kalicha-anarchism-and-christianity.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       On the relationship between anarchism and Christianity        For a differentiated view        Literature “It is taken for granted that anarchists are hostile to all religions [...]. It is also taken for granted that devout Christians abhor anarchy as the source of chaos and the negation of established power. It is these simplistic and unquestioned assumptions that I intend to challenge.” [1] — Jacques Ellul For many, discussing anarchism that is Christian seems just as unfamiliar as discussing a Christianity that is anarchist. Nevertheless, the political-religious movement of Christian anarchism, appearing in various forms, has long existed. Many movements and personalities, both historically and presently, pursue the idea of a libertarian Christianity and emphatically point out that anarchism and Christianity need not be mutually exclusive ideologies. On the contrary, once a certain approach has been found, they converge in content rather than diverge. But what exactly does the term “Christian anarchism” mean? What does a Christianity that claims (or that others claim) to be anarchist look like? How does it reconcile with “classical” anarchism, which is commonly perceived as non-religious or anti-religious? And how does it reconcile with a Christianity that has a reputation for being incompatible with socialisms of any kind? A succinct characterization of Christian anarchism—if one dares to formulate such a thing in a few sentences—could look like this: Christianity is understood in a way that ultimately amounts to something in political and social questions that politically active members of the labor movement of the late 19 th century began to call “anarchism” or “libertarian socialism”—not despite, but because of what is written in the Bible. It is an anarchism that derives from the Bible and the life and work of Jesus. The Bible and the message of Jesus thus serve as a basis for arriving at similar or the same conclusions as those formulated by anarchist theorists: to view the state with all its institutions and representatives as illegitimate, to reject capitalism as an economic system, and to implement an egalitarian, decentralized, and non-violent social order, free from oppression and exploitation, in its place. The French sociologist and philosopher Jacques Ellul, who has contributed significantly to Christian-anarchist theory, writes in this sense that “biblical thought leads directly to anarchism.” [2] But a particular exegesis of the Bible does not necessarily always have to be the focus or serve as the exclusive starting point for a libertarian understanding of Christianity. For the Catholic Worker movement—one of the best-known examples of how even Catholic Christians can relate positively to anarchism—for example, in addition to a libertarian understanding of the Bible, it was always clear that they drew on numerous different political and philosophical doctrines and currents of the left, the combination and blending of which ultimately gave rise to this new movement, which ultimately came to be called “Christian-anarchist.” One of the founders of the Catholic Worker movement, Peter Maurin, for example, was strongly influenced by three schools of thought, namely the French personalists (Emmanuel Mounier, Jacques Maritain), the Russian anarchists (Peter Kropotkin, Leo Tolstoy) [3] and the English distributionists (Eric Gill, G. K. Chesterton, Hilaire Belloc). [4] The traces left by the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) trade union, of which the influential Catholic Workers Dorothy Day and Ammon Hennacy were members, have left in the actions and political priorities of the Catholic Worker movement are also evident. [5] If one takes a closer look at the Catholic Workers’ understanding of anarchism, the picture is again one that requires differentiation and specification. The Catholic Workers are influenced neither by “Stimer’s extreme individualism” nor by “Bakunin’s belief in the creative and redempti…
