---
title: "The Failure of Soviet Privatization"
author: "William Gillis"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-gillis-the-failure-of-soviet-privatization"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "When “The Market” Is Just Money Laundering the Bloodsoaked Riches of Statism"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-gillis-the-failure-of-soviet-privatization.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-gillis-the-failure-of-soviet-privatization.epub"
    hosted: false
---

When the USSR fell one of the “privatization” schemes was to just hand workers stock certificates in the companies they worked at. The problem of course was that the economy was seized up and everyone was starving. So gangsters and the children of the soviet upper-class with actual money bought up all the certificates. They had folks literally go around with wheelbarrows full of vodka trading one bottle for a stock cert. Thus were state enterprises promptly handed over to the existing rich. This is an important historical example because it demonstrated with devastating clarity how “entrepreneurs” with a small amount of unfair seed money can rapidly take over an entire economy and turn it into an oligarchy. The “privatization” of the USSR proceeded in a manner that basically turned the entire state economy over to a few oligarchs. A switch of rule by the central committee to rule by a few — exactly as even Rothbard explicitly noted would constitute no real change whatsoever. It wasn’t a direct hand off — there were extra steps — but the speed at which it happened makes inescapable the fact that this wasn’t the emergence of some new privileged class as the result of a natural hierarchy, but clearly a situation where the centrifugal tendencies of free competition were utterly overwhelmed by vast disparities. We often talk about the egalitarian tendencies and mechanisms, or at least potential, of mature freed markets, but while a market might have certain dominant tendencies near an egalitarian equilibrium to return to such a state of affairs, no one has ever suggested that this will be true for any starting distribution of wealth. It is obvious to everyone that if 100 people own 99.99% of the world their buying power will be leverageable to keep the rest in slavery. The issue of significant contention is where the transition point might be between a distribution of wealth where centrifugal tendencies dominate to a distribution of wealth where centralizing accumulative tendencies dominate. The optimistic would put this point quite high, claiming for example, that even if 1% of the population owned 99% of the wealth, without a state apparatus or similar violent means to capture and use to defend this wealth, such a society would eventually erode said economic privilege away. But what’s less examined when these declarations are traded is the speed at which such erosion would occur. Because let’s be clear: there certainly was some erosion in some contexts in the collapse of the USSR. Of course this erosion came alongside the removal of the welfare systems that had been absolutely necessary to keep an enslaved populace alive, which meant that the net impact was a catastrophe of human suffering. But even in limited bubbles where centrifugal effects dominated over accumulative ones, the overall inequality was often still so sharp as to make that diffusion relatively slow. And ultimately what fucking matter is it if the market will eventually erode away titanic inequality if hordes of people are starving to death today? The sharpest critique of our neoliberal global regime isn’t that it has made people more miserable over time, but that it has not liberated anywhere near fast enough. Anarchists — especially left market anarchists — cannot afford to fail to grapple with why the USSR’s “privatization” process failed so spectacularly to create anything remotely near an egalitarian robustly competitive market. Sure there were structural dynamics of state capture, but the almost immediate centralization of wealth that happened upon the distribution of stock certificates wasn’t actively shepherded along by the state. The somewhat rich growing into the ridiculously rich happened spontaneously. Nor of course can even the reactionaries who love to dodder on about “natural hierarchies”, or other such fascist garbage, make any pretense of a case. We can’t blame animalistic time-preferences, no one beside the existing rich had the capital to buy up…
