---
title: "The CNT and the IWA"
author: "RABIOSO"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rabioso-the-cnt-and-the-iwa"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally written in Spanish by RABIOSO. Translated by Lifelong Wobbly. Parts 1 and 2 retrieved on 2020-03-12 from https://lifelongwobbly.com/2016/12/17/the-cnt-and-the-iwa-part-1-the-cnt-since-franco/ and https://lifelongwobbly.com/2016/12/17/the-cnt-and-the-iwa-part-2-the-crisis-in-the-iwa-as-see"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rabioso-the-cnt-and-the-iwa.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rabioso-the-cnt-and-the-iwa.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Part 1: The CNT Since Franco          Dorian Gray or the Weight Of Glory          The Disaster: Valladolid as an Example          Getting Up to Date After the Split        Part 2: The Crisis in the IWA as Seen From the CNT          Back to the Beginning: From the CNT to the IWA          Return to the Workplace, and the Internal Crises of the CNT-F and USI          The Sorcerer’a Apprentices          Against the USI and the FAU          Beginning of the End, or End of the Beginning? The decision that the CNT took at its eleventh congress (December 2015) to re-found the International Workers Association is the latest act in the process of updating anarcho-syndicalism which began with the resurrection of the CNT in 1977, and which still isn’t finished. After the death of Franco in 1975, Spanish elites initiated a series of measures that would modernize the state apparatus and integrate it into Europe; thanks to this, in 1977 the CNT was able to become legal once again, ending four decades of persecution and illegality. After the initial relief, it didn’t take long for problems to surface. It goes without saying that in the forty years that had passed since the defeat of the 1936 Revolution, the world had changed. During this period, the left had experienced (and survived) Stalinism, WW2, decolonization, the welfare state, the cold war, and the disintegration of the Marxist state in its various forms, to give just a few examples. The world in which anarcho-syndicalism had once flourished had disappeared, and the anarcho-syndicalist movement had ceased to exist, while the CNT turned into a working-class Sleeping Beauty, maintaining its appearance despite the passage of time. At least, that’s how it seemed. Everyone who participated enthusiastically in the re-launching of the CNT soon learned that adapting to the enormous social changes which had taken place since 1939 was something like the Odyssey of Ulysses. It didn’t take long for an infernal dynamic of polarization to begin between those who wanted to find a way to adapt anarcho-syndicalism to the neoliberal world, and those who didn’t want to change anything for fear of ending up as reformists. Naturally, this is a black-and-white vision of the world and there were many more tendencies, but all of them had to face the question of how to adapt to the modern world. We should recognize that behind this fear of the risks associated with modernization, there was a real danger. The Swedish SAC, the only anarcho-syndicalist union deserving of the name that managed to survive the bloodbath of fascism and WW2, is a perfect example. The SAC wasn’t “lucky” enough to have a glorious death fighting against fascism, like the CNT, and it had to face the realities of the post-war world. After initially trying to remain faithful to anarcho-syndicalist principles after the war, the possibility of total marginalization caused a 180 degree change in its strategy, and it ended up integrating itself into the social democratic state model which took root in Sweden. We should also remember, at this point, that the SAC was able to face this dilemma about its future in a very different situation from the reborn CNT in 1977. Its structures were intact, and it had enough of a membership base that it could still function as a union and not a mere propaganda group. The CNT, on the other hand, was facing a very different situation: fascism had torn its structures up by the roots, creating a generational divide. What’s more, the underground situation which the dictatorship had made necessary also made day-to-day anarchist functioning impossible. Large-scale decision making through assemblies – needed to avoid the formation of power cliques – was as impossible as the development of a critical (and rational) mentality, a key task which had been carried out in the anarchist social centers [ ateneos libertarios ]. It didn’t take long for the new CNT to feel the results of what was missing. In Marxism, the…
