---
title: "Anarchist Film Doesn’t Exist"
author: "Videos From The Trash Dimension"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/videos-from-the-trash-dimension-anarchist-film-doesn-t-exist"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A zine based on the video zine of the same name."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "videos-from-the-trash-dimension-anarchist-film-doesn-t-exist.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/videos-from-the-trash-dimension-anarchist-film-doesn-t-exist.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The popular anarchist attitude has dipped in and out of hostility towards DIY culture over the past 10 years and I think I understand. There’s this kind of Martha Stuart-y, Pinterest-y ass thing that goes on in DIY where instead of being a freeing experience, we end up with a new, more accessible market to buy and sell at. So accessibility is the aim there, and of course, I’m an anarchist, so you can guess that my feelings about accessibility are positive. But I think where DIY stops being interesting is when accessibility is the end goal. For me, instead, accessibility is just the method by which control and order is made impossible. If accessibility is total, there’s no more bargaining power to force people to work or obey law. When DIY aims to evade pay walls and legal obstacles, it becomes a criminal thing. This is the anarchist quality often missing from DIY, and more specifically, DIY film. My friends and I sometimes put on screenings of “anarchist films” called Videos From The Trash Dimension. When we collect and screen anonymous videos made without directors or money (which I assume are often made by anarchists) we don’t just do it in order to make film more accessible. We do it to destroy the need for film in the lives of people who crave stories but hate industry. I often put the phrase “anarchist film” in quotes for a few reasons. One of them being due to the word “film” which is a material I expect very few anarchists to purchase before trying to pass off what they are doing as “anarchist”. I put the A word in quotes because there’s like this feverish dissection of our identity as anarchist and it just exhausts me. For me, the anarchist person isn’t the thing, but rather the anarchist event. When we emphasize the identity, we end up with examples of like, anarchists making like 400,000$ films, hiring employees, negotiating their pay in accordance with the film set tradition of “above and bellow the line” organization, and still claiming that it’s an anarchist project. I’m not interested in the anarchist who makes Cinema or Film. I’m much more interested in the anarchist event. Stealing, scamming and sharing equipment, subverting the traditional on-set structure, refusing the aesthetic and practice of money, and even eventually, telling stories that only our unique approach to moral or social code would tell. Hip hop and punk music famously incorporated this approach at one point or another. Pooling equipment, dealing with anti-social subject matter, utilizing crime in their technical process etc. In 1977 New York City had a blackout lasting an entire day. Grandmaster Caz and Disko Wiz have this great interview where they talk about their experience of the night and the period following the blackout. That everybody looted the fuck out of all the electronic stores and everything, snagging speakers and turntables and whatever else. Looters stole the DJ equipment they needed to start recording what they had only been doing with their friends on the street and almost immediately after, a style of hip hop that previously only existed in the Bronx, grew at an explosive rate through the larger world of hip hop. Disko Wiz in particular recalls that the Bronx went from having about 5 active DJs to one on every block, over night. That film, or more accurately, video, hasn’t experienced this kind of assault, is a huge missed opportunity. The kinds of stories that hip hop and punk are able to tell when the accessibility knob is cranked up to 11, defies conventional social and moral code and begins to develop a mythology of life beyond law. A mythology, by the way, that has helped to enrich entire generations of anarchists. The modern turtle island anarchist world is dominated by the idea of truth as the antidote to lies. Lies being a key threat to what is good to anarchists. There’s a kind of western moralization of objective scientific reality that weirdly shapes even the enemies of western moralization. So if you’re an anarch…
