---
title: "Cypriot Anarchist Ideology in the Post-Partitioned Republic of Cyprus (1985 to 1994)"
author: "Antonis Pastellopoulos"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/antonis-pastellopoulos-cypriot-anarchist-ideology-in-the-post-partitioned-republic-of-cyprus-19"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "“Cyprus Belongs to its Mouflons”"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "antonis-pastellopoulos-cypriot-anarchist-ideology-in-the-post-partitioned-republic-of-cyprus-19.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/antonis-pastellopoulos-cypriot-anarchist-ideology-in-the-post-partitioned-republic-of-cyprus-19.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Acknowledgements        1. Introduction        2. Literature Review        3. Methodology          3.1. Data Collection Strategy          3.2. Analysis Strategy          3.3. Discussion of Methodology        4. Findings and Analysis          4.1. Preliminary Analysis: The Structure of Ideology in Greek Cypriot Society          4.2. Authority, Autonomy and the Structure of Signification          4.3. Difference, Homogeneity and Identity          4.4. Theoretical Interpretation: Utopia, Interpellation and the Real        5. Conclusion and Recommendations        6. Bibliography        6.1. Full List of Primary Sources        7. Appendices          Appendix A: Post-1974 Map of Cyprus          Appendix B: Table of Signifiers          Appendix C: Thematic Map of the Cypriot Anarchist Symbolic Order This dissertation examines the structure of Cypriot anarchist ideology and the way it challenges Greek Cypriot ethnic nationalism, as it developed in the first decade following the partition of the island of Cyprus. It aims to contribute to the understanding of grass root political activity in Cyprus, by examining the early expressions of anarchism in the island. Ideology has been argued to function around the use of key discursive signifiers, through which the mediation of a fixed meaning is structured and social reality is experienced. This research confirms this position, but explores this function within a non-hegemonic ideological structure, in the context of a post-conflict society. The primary data consists of Cypriot anarchist magazines and brochures published in the Republic of Cyprus from 1985 to 1994, with an emphasis on the magazine Train in the City . It employs qualitative thematic content analysis to analyse Cypriot anarchist ideological public discourse in the period studied. The dissertation argues that Cypriot anarchist discourse is structured around two key signifiers, that of “Authority” and of “Autonomy”, through which Cypriot anarchist ideology organizes and mediates its fixed set of meanings. It further argues that Cypriot anarchist ideology challenges Greek Cypriot ethnic nationalism, based on its support for social difference. This is expressed predominantly by the new signifiers of identity formulated in the discourse, that of the “Native” and of “Cypriot Identity”. The dissertation concludes with a theoretical interpretation of Cypriot anarchist ideology in the context of the post-partitioned Republic of Cyprus. I would like to thank the group Syspirosi Atakton (Συσπείρωση Ατάκτων) , for making their archive at social space Kaymakkin available, as part of my data collection. This dissertation would not had been possible without the group’s generous help and co-operation. I would also like to thank Dr Dominic Pasura, who served as my dissertation supervisor during the research and writing period. His critical comments and informative suggestions have greatly enriched the quality and content of the dissertation. I would also like to thank here my parents, for the continuous support they have given me during the duration of my studies at the University of Glasgow. Finally, I would like to offer my appreciation to my friends Alexis Ioannidis and Nikos Moushouttas. Their friendship, theoretical concerns, critical readings and our shared discussions have been, and continue to be central in my self-development, as well as in shaping, expanding and challenging my understanding of social, economic and cultural theory. This dissertation examines the structure of ideology of Cypriot anarchism, as it presented itself through its public discourse from 1985 to 1994 in the Republic of Cyprus. While there is a continuous, anarchist-influenced grass root political activity in the island, there is no research on the ideological content of Cypriot anarchism, or in its emergence and early development. This dissertation sets out to fill this empirical gap, by answering the following primary question: ‘What is …
