---
title: "Afghanistan Bleeds for You"
author: "Rob los Ricos"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rob-los-ricos-afghanistan-bleeds-for-you"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "originally published in Street Roots newspaper, August and September, 2001 retrieved on 12/2/2022 from https://web.archive.org/web/20170316224637/https://roblosricos.wordpress.com/about/afghanistan-bleeds-for-you/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rob-los-ricos-afghanistan-bleeds-for-you.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rob-los-ricos-afghanistan-bleeds-for-you.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Part 1        Part 2 This (9/11 and the eventual invasion and occupation of Afghanistan) is all Jimmy Carter’s fault. Despite his reputation as a champion of democracy and the poor, former President Carter is directly responsible for the blood and carnage in the mountains of Afghanistan and the fields of Pennsylvania. Back during the Cold War, the Carter administration was stinging from a rebuke at the hands of the Organization of American States. The OAS had roundly rejected Carter’s request to create a military coalition to invade Nicaragua and oust the victorious revolutionary government of the Sandinistas. Formally known as the FSLN, they had successfully overthrown the corrupt, vile Somosa dictatorship. The Carter administration didn’t view the Sandinista rebellion as a legitimate response of an oppressed nation to rid itself of a government run by thieves and murderers, but as a territorial loss to the Communist Menace . A loss in America’s own backyard, no less. Something had to be done, and the wise asses in Washington came up with a brilliant plan. There sat Afghanistan: a simple, slightly backward country RIGHT ON THE SOVIET UNION’S BORDER! With little national infrastructure, the country was more an alliance of tribal and ethnic groups than a country. It would be child’s play for a superpower like the U.S. to destabilize the pro-Soviet government in Kabul by playing off different ethnic groups against the secular government, which had little influence beyond the capital’s vicinity. Carter began to funnel arms and money into Afghanistan, via Pakistan, and to develop groups of Islamic jihadists to attack the Communist Menace’s puppet regime there. Radical clergymen and opium producers were converted into ruthless, well-armed warlords and set against the Afghan regime, which crumbled almost instantly. When the mighty Red Army invaded Afghanistan to “restore order,” the Soviets had stepped into Carter’s trap. Carter could now claim to support “freedom fighters” in their bid to oust the Communist Menace from their country. Years later, when the Soviet army retreated from its own Vietnamesque defeat, the last general to remove his troops from Afghanistan summarized his experience as “Dust, lice, and blood.” Rather than usher in a new era of peace and democracy, however, the loss of centralized governmental authority escalated the violence. Rival factions of jihadis and opium warlords battled for supremacy. After the collapse of the Red Menace, the U.S. washed its hands of Afghanistan, and declined to help solve the turmoil it had created. Years of conflict followed and Afghanistan’s major cities were reduces to mounds of ruins. Yet the wise asses in Washington, under the Reagan, Bush and Clinton administrations, had come up with yet another plan for Afghanistan. In order to tap into vast oil and natural gas reserves in land-locked central Asia, oil producers instructed the U.S. government to put an end to the factionalism that prevented Afghanistan from coalescing into a nation. In order to get to the oil and gas, they needed a pipeline across the divided, warring country. Suddenly, the U.S. threw its money and weaponry at a new militant group it created in Pakistan with the aid of a Bush family acquaintance, Osama bin Laden. These Taliban (which means “religious students”) were recruited from all the Islamic world and were the most devoted and military-minded of the jihadis (“holy warriors”). With the country nearly bled dry, the Taliban swept across Afghanistan, promising to bring stability and peace to the country after nearly two decades of civil war. Many people took them at their word and welcomed the Taliban. The Taliban never fulfilled their promises. They ruled through arbitrary use of force and did nothing to alleviate wretched living conditions, which their strict edicts exacerbated. The Taliban enforced a version of so-called Islamic Law more repressive than any found throughout the history of Islam. Wh…
