---
title: "Class Struggle and Mental Health"
author: "libcom.org, Anonymous, Lyn X, Lauren Purje, Tina Phillips, b Patrick, Stephanie McMillan, Carolyn Hiler, Dr. Charlotte Cooper, Kelly Bastow, Baggelboy, Evangelos Artemou"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-class-struggle-and-mental-health"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Live to Fight Another Day"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-class-struggle-and-mental-health.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-class-struggle-and-mental-health.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction Class Struggle and Mental Health: Live to Fight Another Day      Terminology      Part 1: General Advice      Part 2: Management Strategies      Part 3: Personal Accounts        “ The key thing for me was to allow people to help me...”        “ To refuse the feeling that I only deserved bleakness...”        “ Be Good to Yourself ”        “ My sensitive heart...” ”        “ I can’t afford to wait until after capitalism has been abolished to be happy, and I doubt you can either. ”        “ Remember that there will be a day when the lights start to get turned back on again... ”        “The Personal is Political”        “ The revolution will wait for you. ”          Psychologist and psychiatrist: Give the pain a name          Avoid the guilt: Do one thing, be proud of it.          Activism: Only if you’re feeling well.        We must create our own messages of self- respect and pride in our humanity. “What the spectacle has taken from reality must now be retaken from the spectacle.”      Part 4: Links      Part 5: Advice from Radical Mental Health Professionals        Therapy for Anarchists, Class Warriors, and the Rest of Us          The holy grail          The reality          Other routes          Finally...        Striving and Thriving: Mental Health on the Radical Left        Dealing with Mental Health Services: Advice from an Anarchist Mental Health Worker      Part 6: Essays and Organisational Culture and Mental Health        Be Good to Your Comrades: Why Being a Prick is Counterrevolutionary        A Proposal for Collective Accommodation      Part 7: Tips and Discussion Topics for Groups and Organisations      Credits: About Our Contributors... This piece of writing comes out of a series of discussions which occurred on the forums of libcom.org. It was repeatedly raised that depression, mental illness, and emotional stress are very common amongst libertarian political activists. Furthermore, suffering from mental illness as someone who is politically active often comes with its own set of complications. Sometimes the wider anarchist/ activist community is supportive and helpful. Other times, we can feel just as alienated amongst fellow anarchists as we do from the rest of capitalist society. With that in mind, the goal of this pamphlet is to offer some advice on what’s generally helpful in maintaining overall mental health. We have various sections that look at these issues from different angles, roughly as follows: General advice Management strategies Personal accounts Links Advice from anarchist/radical mental health workers Essays on organisational culture and mental health Tips and discussion topics for groups and organisations We don’t, however, want to pretend for a second that this pamphlet is a substitute for professional medical advice. While we’re critical of certain aspects of mental health treatment, if you’re suffering from severe depression or considering hurting yourself, please speak to someone immediately. Living with depression isn’t easy. Far too often, on a societal as well as inter- personal level, mental health issues are ignored—or worse, written off with sufferers being blamed as weak or just overreacting. Aside from the personal sense of alienation that often accompanies mental illness, the institutions of capitalist society offer sufferers very little control over their treatment. Mental illness treatment is atomised and commodified, complete with hierarchy, coercion and the pressures of budgets, profit, and, bureaucracy. Mental health facilities in schools are woefully lacking and while there’s no problem calling off work because you’re physically ill, very few employers have provisions for short or long-term mental health leave. Hospitals and mental health institutions often embody the very worst of institutional power. [1] It’s imperative, then, that the class struggle community take issues of mental health seriously. Mental health should be discussed and there ought to be net…
