---
title: "My Book of Hours"
author: "Frans Masereel"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/frans-masereel-my-book-of-hours"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Frans Masereel Group, AKA: Masereel Group, Frans Masereel Group: My Book of Hours"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "frans-masereel-my-book-of-hours.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/frans-masereel-my-book-of-hours.epub"
    hosted: false
---

2020 Preface The Masereel Group is devoted to spreading the public domain works of this great artist. The text was first acquired and then scanned. Then it was cropped, rotated, balanced, contrasted, saturated, despeckled, noise-reductioned, and some manually touched up. This was followed by OCR scanning, manual proofreading, and translating into English. This book is in the public domain in the United States (because it was published before 1925), but it is not public domain in Europe (because its author died in 1972). But the Masereel Group is based in the United States, so everything within here is released under the Public Domain, and all content that is not allowed to be licensed under the Public Domain is released under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) 3.0 License. UprisingEngineer, Masereel Group, August 30, 2020 MY BOOK OF HOURS 167 DESIGNS ENGRAVED ON WOOD BY FRANS MASEREEL --- Foreword by -- ROMAIN ROLLAND --- My Book of Hours Se trouve chez l'Auteur THIS EDITION IS STRICTLY LIMITED TO 600 COPIES FOR AMERICA. EACH COPY IS SIGNED. No. 544 Frans Masereel [Signature] FOREWORD During the war, Switzerland was the refuge of a small number of artists who refused to take part in the fratricidal conflict of the European nations, and kept their faith in the internationality of thought. Frans Masereel, of Ghent, was one of the most prominent. Settled at Geneva, but linked in friendship with the little group of liberal French minds in the front rank of which shone the names of the poets, René Arcos and P. J. Jouve, he shared with them--and with us--the sorrow and mental revolt of those dark years. This community of trials cemented among us a union of mind that was at once our happiness and pride. I owe a debt to exile for giving us such brave comrades, and above all the good and great Masereel, big-hearted and great-minded. Our blood-stained era, which concealed under the guise of heroism and idealism so much cruelty and so much hypocrisy, demanded the flaying stroke of a Daumier or a Goya. Masereel is of their line. His drawings, which appeared daily during several years in La Feuille de Genewe , “Rise, Ye Dead!” and “The Dead Speak” are works of retribution, cries of outraged sorrow that will reverberate down the ages. Those momentous works, of a ghastly power, testify to the sufferings through which the soul of the poet was passing. It was inevitable that he should succumb. The spectacle of death haunted him. He tried to rouse himself and turn his thoughts to life, the life of peace-time, but he found there the same oppression, the same injustices, continual warfare. He records it in one of his most admirable works, “Twenty-five Pictures of the Sufferings of a Man.” Here, the moral excellence of the protagonist-—a simple workman-—triumphs over the cares and fears of social life, and fixes the stamp of his sturdy judgment on the courts which try and convict him. A sublime melancholy pervades this virile tragedy. This was the first step up out of the abyss toward a new life. Henceforward, the spirit had heard the voices of the “gai scavoir” of freedom. Life is seen as a show, a great tragico-comedy, where the soul plays its part, but even while participating in the action of the play, frees itself, as if with a flap of its wings, and looks down upon life from a height as it were, laughing, somewhat pitifully, at its own efforts, at its joys, even at its own sufferings. “My Book of Hours” is the expression of this triumphant liberty. It is even more winged, more enraptured in the books which follow, such as “The Sun,” in which the liberated imagination is not content with looking merely at life, but must needs have the dream, too. I will not attempt to pass judgment on an art which is still in the state of a metal undergoing fusion in the melting-pot. There are so many conflicting forces in Masereel, such varied passions, fantasies and ideals! His style is constantly undergoing change: at first realistic (as in the fifte…
