---
title: "A Catechism of Anarchy"
author: "John Henry Mackay, Voltairine de Cleyre, Mary Hansen, Social Science Club"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/social-science-club-a-catechism-of-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Preface by the Alliance of the Libertarian Left. Retrieved on 27th December 2024 from store.c4ss.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "social-science-club-a-catechism-of-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/social-science-club-a-catechism-of-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Preface        Anarchy        A Catechism of Anarchy “A Catechism of Anarchy” was originally published anonymously in 1902 as a booklet of the Social Science Club in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. This edition was first published by the Alliance of the Libertarian Left in December 2011. The text is based upon the original edition, as preserved in the Labadie Collection in Ann Arbor, Michigan. The Social Science Club was a working-class Anarchist reading and discussion group established in Philadelphia by Voltairine de Cleyre, and other members of the Philadelphia social movement. The group met every Sunday evening and included prominent defenders of Individualist, Mutualist, and Communist Anarchism, as well as other members who were interested in Anarchistic principles but did not identify themselves as Anarchists. The Club sponsored lectures, held discussions, and published both new works and translations of classic texts from the Anarchist tradition. The “Catechism” was published by the group as a whole without a signature; the Labadie Collection attributes the work to the Individualist anarchist speaker and activist Voltairine de Cleyre. But Candace Falk et al. (“Social Science,” in the Directory of Organizations, Emma Goldman: A Documentary History of the American Years) report an article from the Anarchist paper Free Society, in which the Danish-American anarchist Mary Hansen acknowledged that she had written the first draft. According to Hansen, the final essay was a project of the Club and was finished collectively by the membership, which included de Cleyre, Natasha Notkin, George Brown, Perle McLeod, and many others. Special thanks are due to Brian Truncale of Chicago, Illinois, for bringing this booklet to our attention. (Translated from the German by Harry Lyman Koopman.) John Henry Mackay. What is Anarchism? - A social theory which regards the union of order with the absence of all direct government of man by man as the political ideal; absolute individual liberty. - Century Dictionary. Who are Anarchists? Those who accept this ideal, believing that the highest social results will be obtained through the substitution of self-control for all outward authorities, civil or moral. What is Civil Authority? That force which interferes with our daily actions, making and punishing criminals, commonly called government. How does Government make Criminals? By fostering an unjust system of distribution, wherein one man is dependent on another for his subsistence; failing to secure it he is forced to resort to crime, for which, again, the government punishes him. This accounts only for Thefts; what of Murder? It is hunger, or dread of deprivation, which drives most men to acts of violence. What of such as are prompted by Jealousy, Hatred, or Revenge? Either they are the acts of derangement, temporary or permanent, and to be treated as such, or they are survivals of primitive instincts, which all social experience shows must be outgrown through education and the gradual extension of individual rights; repressive legislation only makes them more savage; revenge cannot be cured by revenge. Since Anarchists claim that Crime results from Economic Injustice, how would the Abolition of Government effect Economic Justice? The force which protects the owners of the great natural sources of production and means of exchange being removed, people would be free to experiment and discover what economic arrangement was best, instead of being compelled to accept the decision of the ruling majority or minority. What Economic System do Anarchists propose? There are different schools; mainly Socialist, Individualist, Communist, and Mutualist. The terms Anarchist and Socialist are not, then, contradictory? Not in the least; it is only those who confuse socialism, which is a purely economic proposition, with the Socialist Party, which is an organization working for the realization of that proposition through political action, who conceive them…
