---
title: "Empire in Central Asia"
author: "Terry Clancy"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/terry-clancy-empire-in-central-asia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Terry Clancy lives in Ireland and writes for the Free Earth website. He is a member of the Anarchist Federation. Retrieved on 16th December 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "terry-clancy-empire-in-central-asia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/terry-clancy-empire-in-central-asia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Pipelines        The Afghan Pipeline        God told me to do it — The Iranian Challenge        The Democracy of the Oil Barons — the American Expansion.        A House Divided        Conclusion In the early 1990’s the last 19 th Century European empire crumbled. The longest lasting, although ironically originally one of the weakest. Just as other powers moved into the vacuum left by the relative weakening of the old West European ones, so too today this is happening with the decline of the Russian Empire. The weakening of Russian power in what was it’s southern colonial empire is opening up the way for other imperialisms. Central Asia and the Caucasus, or the Caspian Region as it is also known, is a largely forgotten corner of the world, but with all the ingredients of a new Middle East, it may not be for much longer. Imperialist competition in the region is centred around the exploitation of it’s considerable resources of oil and gas, principally centred on the different costs and benefits accruing to different factions of the ruling class from various pipeline projects. Firstly I’m going to look at those, before turning to look at the interests and goals of three different players in the carve up of Central Asia: Iran, the United States and Russia (others include Turkey, the E.U. and China but restrictions of time and space work against a full exploration). The principal energy resources in the Caspian Region are to be found in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan. All three states are essentially landlocked, the Caspian sea being an inland sea with no connection to the oceans. As a result, a major aspect of the international competition over the exploitation of these resources is the struggle over which route to take to the sea and the global market. There are a number of options, each with their own advocates and each reflecting rival agendas. The Northern Route (via Russia): The Northern route would consist of an upgrading of the existing Kazak and Russian pipeline systems, plus a new one linking Baku in Azerbaijan with the Russian port of Novorossisk on the Black Sea. Obviously this is the option favoured by the Russian rulers, as it maintains their dominance of Central Asia and provides a source of revenue to them. The Southern Route (via Iran): From a purely practical point of view this is the most sensible option, with the shortest distance as it is able to plug into the Iranian pipeline system and it provides access to the growing South Asian market. Opposed by the United States, both because of that state’s hostility to Iran and because it doesn’t represent a diversification of energy sources — which is a U.S. goal we will be returning to. Nonetheless this is the only one of the new routes which is actually up and running. The Eastern Route (via China): The longest and most expensive route but favoured by the Chinese government, and being developed by them, it also allows them to exploit the resources in their western provinces. The Western Route (via Turkey): This is favoured by Turkey, the United States and Israel. There are three options here; firstly a pipeline to the port of Suspa in Georgia and then through the Bosporus straits to Europe. The Turkish claim is that the straits will not be able to handle the increased amount of shipping and propose instead a pipeline from Azerbaijan to Ceyhan on Turkey’s Mediterranean coast. The high costs of this proposal have promoted an alternative American plan to bypass the Bosporus straits with a pipeline going through Bulgaria and Greece. The South Eastern Route (via Afghanistan): This is the reason why in years past Taliban hierarchs popped up in Texas and other unlikely places. It has been argued that this proposal was a reason behind both Osama Bin Laden’s war on the U.S. and the U.S. action in Afghanistan. With the fall of the Taliban this route has again entered the running. Note that it avoids Iran while delivering to the South Asian market, which is much…
