---
title: "“Crisis Of Their Own Legitimacy”"
author: "Tom Nomad, Peter Gelderloos"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-tom-nomad-crisis-of-their-own-legitimacy-peter-gelderloos-and-tom-nomad-on-the"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "To support Peter Gelderloos, who is recovering from surgery for a potentially fatal brain tumor, go here: https://www.gofundme.com/f/support-peter-kaniku-other-cleveland-organizers Retrieved on July 5th, 2023 from https://itsgoingdown.org/elite-crisis-interview/."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-gelderloos-tom-nomad-crisis-of-their-own-legitimacy-peter-gelderloos-and-tom-nomad-on-the.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-tom-nomad-crisis-of-their-own-legitimacy-peter-gelderloos-and-tom-nomad-on-the.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The following interview with Tom Nomad and Peter Gelderloos offers up an anarchist analysis of the ongoing political fallout of Trump’s recent indictment and its impact on both the political landscape and the upcoming 2024 election cycle. IGD: What does the current wave of indictments against Trump say about the current state of the elites in the US? Is this a move by the Democrats and their section of the ruling class to remove Trump by legal means, or just the slow mechanisms of the legal apparatus catching up with Trump? What can we learn from the growing divisions with the ruling class? Tom Nomad: I think there are really two things going on here, and neither are able to be explained simply by saying Democrats are trying to get rid of Trump; it is more important than that. For Trump to be indicted federally like this means that the Department of Justice (DOJ) has determined that it is in the “best interest of the public” to prosecute these charges, and that this public benefit outweighs the potential for social or political unrest. The DOJ was caught in a difficult place. If they tried to just indict him for everything, without extreme due process, and a really specific harm that they could point to as a result of his actions, then the fear is that MAGA rage would be stirred up. If they just let this slide, then it creates what in economics is called moral hazard, the idea that because someone was bailed out for previous egregious actions, then they can continue to do those actions and get bailed out in the future; this was the argument against economic bailouts in 2008 for example. This tells me that the calculus in relation to both the strength and loyalty of his base, and the severity of his actions, has shifted, with the harm being seen as more concrete and significant, and the backlash seeming less likely. Right after January 6th this would have been impossible without significant violence. But, Trump has been losing support, and losing influence among his supporters; there is a MAGA after Trump discussion. The shift in his support, coupled with the fear of future presidents acting in this way, is largely what is driving these charges being filed right now. That also tells me that we are seeing a situation not unlike that which existed around the New Deal, where different elements of the capitalist class were making different calculations about the best actions to take to preserve the system in the wake of the Great Depression. In the early 30s, the anti-New Deal crowd was arguing that the creation of social services would create dependent citizens that the wealthy would need to support for decades, while Roosevelt and some of the more progressive capitalists were arguing that without these services capitalism would be destroyed in the near future through workers’ actions. In this scenario, most of the capitalist class decided that it made more sense to save themselves in the long run, and took actions that are still seen by some as a betrayal of their class interests. I think that in this scenario, the calculation is similar in a way. The DOJ is concerned that a continuation of this politics of animus, overt distortion, and combative existential conflict will shatter the stability of the political system, and they are correct. So, they are calculating that the short term political unrest that could result here is more manageable than the far longer term crisis in legitimacy that results from them not doing anything and letting Trump off. Peter Gelderloos: Both the Democrats and Republicans are trying to restore and revitalize state power in the face of a major crisis of governance. This crisis, of course, is just another facet of the broader crisis engulfing the planet at the moment, but because as they are prioritizing the crisis of their own legitimacy and effectiveness to rule, they risk excluding or failing to grasp the general crisis – and may well exacerbate it. The January 6th far-Right tantrum, the leaking of…
