---
title: "Building the Revolutionary Party?"
author: "Geoff Foote"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/geoff-foote-building-the-revolutionary-party"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published in Libertarian Communist Review No. 1 by the Organisation of Revolutionary Anarchists. Retrieved on 8th August 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "geoff-foote-building-the-revolutionary-party.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/geoff-foote-building-the-revolutionary-party.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I. Social democracy        2. The Stalinist parties        3. Lenin’s concept of the party        4. Leninist substitutionism        5. The Trotskyist attitude        6. Lenism — the I.S. variant        7. The Libertarian position Since the 1917 Russian Revolution, it has been generally accepted on the left that a revolutionary party, in the sense of a ‘van-guard’, is necessary for a successful revolution. Anarchist criticism has been shrugged off as coming from a numerically insignificant group of purists, who, unlike the Leninists, have never carried out a successful revolution. However, the denunciation of Stalin by Khruschev, and the crushing of the Hungarian revolt in 1956 (among other things) has made it manifestly clear to all but the most blinkered that the revolution in Russia has been a failure. It might have been thought that Leninism would have been completely discredited, but myths about Stalin have been replaced by myths about Mao or Castro, or in the case of the Trotskyists the myth that the revolution could have been successful, if it had the ‘correct’ leadership. Leninism, in its Stalinist or Trotskyist forms, remains the dominant ideology of the revolutionary left, partly because the emphasis on authority and leadership is more comprehensible to people raised in an authoritarian society than is the Anarchist rejection of authoritarianism. Anarchism has often gained ground after a revolution, when people resent attempts to reimpose authority on them. But though in the present situation in Britain, the Anarchists are numerically even more insignificant than the Trotskyists, our ideas remain important since they not only raise the question of the nature of post revolutionary society, but also the related problem of how to launch a successful revolution. This is seen above all in the Anarchist rejection of the revolutionary party in its Leninist sense. The main argument of this article is that the party is the reflection of the society it seeks to create. In looking at the major left groupings — social democratic, Stalinist, Leninist, Trotskyist — there is obviously a certain simplification. For instance, I ignore theories put forward by Gramsci and Luxembourg as well as groupings like the left of the Labour Party (a peculiar amalgam of Methodism, Social Democracy and Stalinism). A lack of space does not allow as complete a discussion of the problem as I would like, and certainly people like Gramsci should not be ignored. However, at this time it is necessary to concentrate on the main party groupings. In bourgeois democratic society the structure of these political parties which support the existing social order — conservative or reformist — are mirrors of a hierarchical authoritarian society. In the same way it can be said that those organisations which seek to transform society in the interests of the working class reflect within their structure the type of society they wish to create. The social democratic party, for example, derives its structure from its attitude towards bourgeois authority. Social democrats seek to create a socialist society on behalf of the working class, but fail to challenge the institutions of bourgeois democracy. Since social democrats accept the authority of the bourgeois state and law, they become agents of that authority. They make the mistake of assuming that the state stands above the class conflict, to be captured at elections by the representatives of the bourgeoisie or the proletariat. In fact the State is in the midst of the class struggle, operating as the armed wing of the ruling class. This can be seen not only in this country, but also in other European Social Democratic parties (e.g.. the French socialists under Mollet sent troops on an imperialist expedition to Suez in 1956 — and justified it in Marxist terms. The German social democrats have a long history of acting as instruments of bourgeois authority, from their suppression of the Spartakist revolt to their s…
