---
title: "Detention is Better Than Cure?"
author: "Safehouse Infoshop"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/safehouse-infoshop-detention-is-better-than-cure"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Railroading of the Anti-Terrorism Bill Amidst the Pandemic"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "safehouse-infoshop-detention-is-better-than-cure.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/safehouse-infoshop-detention-is-better-than-cure.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We have witnessed the government respond to the health crisis with military and police might. Over 30,000 people were arrested and detained, while those estimated to be affected of the actual virus only amounts to less than number. Many were detained for non-violent acts. Some were beaten up for not wearing masks. Others were shot dead, with the president’s grace, for mere disobedience. Demolitions continued. And despite strict security measures in the streets, human rights activist were gunned down. Detention is better than cure. This might have been the mantra of the state during this pandemic. As early as January of 2020, there were suggestions to deploy a travel ban to avoid the spread the virus in the archipelago. But as the president and the health secretary claimed, their priority during those months was tourism, the economy, and diplomatic relations. Four months after the first cases were documented, there is still no plan for nationwide mass testing, despite the billions they have received from declaring emergency powers, and the billions they acquired from foreign debt which we will pay for in the future. Consistently, the government announced confusing guidelines. First they announced that people should stock up supplies, then, they announced dole outs and scheduled trips to the markets. On all instances, mass of people rushed to groceries and dole out sites, risked higher chances of infection. Subsequently, government loyalists started blaming the poor for “spreading the virus”, when the virus should have been controlled months ago. This incompetency in handling the pandemic has been too obvious. And weeks before the quarantine ends, the so called Anti-Terrorism Bill was approved in the Senate quite very timely. The Bill has been criticised for its vague definitions of what “terrorism” is. Critics called it the “Terror Bill” as it threatens to violate basic human and constitutional rights. Though the bill claims that it will “uphold basic rights” and it will not proscribe “advocacy, protests, dissent, stoppage of work, industrial and mass actions” to be terroristic acts, the bill, when examined, contains obvious loop holes and vague definitions. For instance, any serious damage to government or private facility is proscribed as terroristic, as long as the government ascribe it as intending to promote fear and destabilization. As well as joining rallies which they deem to be “a serious risk to public safety”. The breach of privacy of persons which they “suspect“ as terrorists is also entertained in the bill. Playing the republican mindset, this is a clear violation of the constitutional right of a person’s innocence until there is proof of guilt in front of a fair trial. The only thing that a military or police personnel needs is an order from the Court of Appeals to “secretly” begin using technologies to breach one’s private affairs. But come to think of it, if they can do surveillance “secretly”, does the CA have the means to know if any personnel have been breaking the law? In section 19, it states that the personnel in charge must report to the CA if there are any violations done during surveillance and interrogation. Now, would a military or police personnel really incriminate himself or his colleagues? Especially now when it is common knowledge that the police and military are capable of planting evidences. Here we are reminded of the shoot-out between the police and a military veteran, when the police took the bag of the shot military personnel when it was not their job to do so. Eye-witnesses never saw any gun, but after the police took his bag, brought it inside the police car, there suddenly appeared a gun in the bag, later proven to be planted. In this kind of state, everyone can be a terrorist, given that evidences are planted. This was also said to be a common tactic during their celebrated drug-war campaign. Over 30,000 small fish drug-users and pushers were killed. Only a handful of rich dealers were …
