---
title: "Gino Lucetti and the attempt on Mussolini’s life"
author: "Pietro de Piero"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pietro-de-piero-gino-lucetti-and-the-attempt-on-mussolini-s-life"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Umanita Nova 26.10.1986. Translated by Paul Sharkey. Retrieved on 3rd March 2024 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "pietro-de-piero-gino-lucetti-and-the-attempt-on-mussolini-s-life.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pietro-de-piero-gino-lucetti-and-the-attempt-on-mussolini-s-life.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Anybody who maintains that wherever in Italy there are anarchists there are republicans as well (on account of their common individualist, libertarian roots) has a telling example in Avenza. Although very different from Menconi, his countryman, contemporary and friend, the anarchist Gino Lucetti, with his very individualistic outlook is the other outstanding figure of local antifascism, and not just local. Many of those who knew him remember him continually in thought, with a book under his arm, strolling along the riverbank. Of working-class background, he was virtually self-taught and on the basis of this self-procured education he took part in the political struggles of the 1920’s, confronting the fascists on many occasions. In one skirmish, rougher than the usual, in the popular ‘Napoleon Cafe’ he was wounded in the neck by a shot from a pistol following an exchange of shots with a fascist (one Perfetti) who was shot in the ear. He went to ground near Montignoso, unable to find a doctor prepared to remove the bullet. After a few days he was smuggled aboard ship for France where he was finally given treatment. There he schemed the attempt on Mussolini’s life that was to make him famous: albeit hard up (an unsuspecting countryman of his, Lina Squassoni, who lived in Aubagne near Marseilles, lent him the money for the trip) he returned to Italy and Rome there to make his attempt on the Duce’s life on 11 September 1926. He loitered near the Porta Pia waiting for the Duce to pass by: when the famous Lancia carrying Benito Mussolini drew near, Lucetti hurled a bomb of the SIDE type which smashed against the windscreen. But it failed to explode, bounced onto the running board and only exploded when it was some metres away on the pavement. In the ensuing confusion, Lucetti sheltered in the doorway at No. 13, Via Nomentana, but the Duce’s police bodyguards soon caught up with him, kicking and punching him: they found him in possession of a second bomb of the same make, a handgun with six dumdum bullets poisoned with muriatic acid, and a dagger. At police headquarters, under ferocious questioning, he let it be known that his name was Ermete Giovanni, from Castelnuovo Garfagnana. On account of this phoney story, he led the regime a merry dance, as a result of which their enquiries focused solely upon uncovering the leaders of the conspiracy of which he was allegedly part, in Garfagnana and nowhere else! Road blocks were thrown up and dozens of people arrested: when Lucetti at last gave his true particulars the whole investigation was shown up as ridiculous. At the end of his trial in 1927, he was sentenced to 30 years’ imprisonment. Two others, held to have been his accomplices, Leandro Sorio and his countryman Stefano Vatteroni were sentenced to 20 years and 19 years 9 months respectively. Lucetti was lodged in the Santo Stefano prison where he spent nearly 17 years before being moved to Ischia where he died on 15 September 1943, according to some sources in a US air raid. Others claim (and among them was Mauro Cacurna who went to recover the body and picked up information on the spot) that the shells that killed him had been fired by the Germans who were still in occupation of Procida, nearby. Let it be noted for the record that some years ago L’Unita carried a piece in which it was claimed on the basis of testimony by one of Lucetti’s fellow inmates that Gino Lucetti had become a communist in his later years. But Carrara anarchists adamantly deny this and are supported by the testimony of Lucetti’s brother and his fiancee who visited him right up to the end. So much for the overall story, drawn from a variety of writings and evidence. But on the basis of statements made to this writer by Ugo Mazzuchelli of Carrara, on the basis of statements made to him in turn by Stefano Vatteroni interesting details can be added. Let us say first of all that the assassination plan was hatched in the climate of antifascist Italian exile circles i…
