---
title: "Don’t give up, don’t sell out"
author: "Phil Kuznetsov"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/phil-kuznetsov-and-comrades-don-t-give-up-don-t-sell-out"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Torture and testimony"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "phil-kuznetsov-and-comrades-don-t-give-up-don-t-sell-out.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/phil-kuznetsov-and-comrades-don-t-give-up-don-t-sell-out.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Where do principles come from?        It used to be no better        Experience of revolutionaries        How to resist torture?        What is wrong with the inquisitorial approach?        Dubovsky case        A few more words        Conclusion Since 2017 our movement has faced repression of a scale and intensity previously unseen. The main distinctive feature of the situation is the massive use of torture by the Federal Security Service (FSB). Previously, cases of beatings and torture of anarchists in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus were rather isolated exceptions. We heard that radical Islamists and fascists were tortured brutally. Some may recall the “Odessa case” against communists and anarchists. But it’s one thing to “know” something in the abstract, quite another to experience it on your own skin. Torture resulted in many people testifying against comrades and cooperating with investigators after falling into the hands of the special services. The current crisis of the Russian anarchist movement is not just the result of old splits and brutal repression. Perhaps an even greater challenge faced is the moral one of torture, of giving up information, of betrayal, to which we have not yet fully responded. How to evaluate the situation where, during the course of an investigation, many people betray comrades? Can torture serve as a justification? What to do when popular members of the movement, as in the case of, for example, Igor Shishkin from the “Network” case, turn out to be among the people crushed by the FSB to the point of collaboration? These questions cannot be dismissed. Because, after all, they raise the main problem: is the contemporary anarchist movement something serious? Is its existence meaningful at all? The issue of torture and betrayal is the most important ethical dilemna of the anarchist movement in recent years. Without dealing with it, we can go no further. The palette of judgments that can be heard in anarchist circles falls on a spectrum between two extreme positions: “No one can be accountable for testimony given under torture” and “It is unacceptable to give new information to the enemy, no matter the circumstances. Anyone who does so is a traitor, a snitch, an informer.” Spoiler: the truth here is NOT somewhere in the middle. It is much closer to the second thesis. But still not identical to it. Let’s look at it in more detail. We learn from an early age that “snitching is unacceptable.” But why is that? Especially in the case of torture, if we look at it from a personal perspective, it is easier to give the torturers what they want and stop the suffering. There are several arguments why this is not acceptable. At a minimum, by starting to collectively participate in endeavors potentially drawing State repression, people expect shared secrets to be kept safe. Giving them away is a violation of that trust. No one would take these risks knowing in advance that in a bad situation a comrade will reveal everything to the cops. But perhaps the strongest reason to not give comrades up is different: by giving information to your enemies, you literally break the lives of other people, and people who are probably not strangers to you, since you know something about them. Because of you, they will also be facing torture and years in prison. Yet these arguments are also relative. In fact, like any ethical principle, the principle of not turning comrades in cannot be fully “rationalized.” However, collective tradition, culture, and experience tell us that this principle is true. In Kropotkin’s terms, “moral sense” tells us this. On the same grounds, we put collective obligations above personal comfort. Moreover, these commitments have no “expiration date”: if someone is disillusioned and leaves the movement, and after a while finds themselves in front of cops and turn their former associates in, the fault of such a person does not become less. So, we take it as a principle that it is unacceptable to pass o…
