---
title: "Exchange on “Black Flame”"
author: "Lucien van der Walt, Spencer Sunshine"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/spencer-sunshine-and-lucien-van-der-walt-exchange-on-black-flame"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 12th September 2021 from lucienvanderwalt.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "spencer-sunshine-and-lucien-van-der-walt-exchange-on-black-flame.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/spencer-sunshine-and-lucien-van-der-walt-exchange-on-black-flame.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       REVIEW        RESPONSE. Black Flame and the broad anarchist tradition: a reply to Spencer Sunshine Anarchist Studies , which describes itself as “an inter-disciplinary journal of scholarly research into the history, culture and theory of anarchism”, some time back carried a critical review of Lucien van der Walt and Michael Schmidt’s Black Flame: the revolutionary class politics of anarchism and syndicalism by Spencer Sunshine. Lucien van der Walt was permitted to write a reply, which addressed some of the issues raised by Sunshine… Both parts are included below. In summary , Sunshine’s review praised Black Flame for “the best assemblage of research I have encountered on classical anarchism’s complex relationship to questions of nationalism, imperialism and race”, and its “stress on the rich anarchist and syndicalist traditions in Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean,” “a ‘crucial corrective to Eurocentric accounts’”. However, he also claimed the book was “infuriating”, since it had a “highly unusual” definition of anarchism (i.e. anarchism as a form of libertarian socialism), leading to the exclusion of the (so-called) “philosophical, individualist, spiritual and ‘lifestyle’ traditions” (supposedly the “majority” of today’s anarchists). In response, Lucien van der Walt noted that Sunshine provided no serious evidence to refute the book’s core theses e.g. that the global anarchist movement emerged in the First International, that syndicalism is an integral part … that this tradition centres on rationalism, socialism and anti-authoritarianism … the writings of Mikhail Bakunin and Pyotr Kropotkin … and that this ‘narrow’ definition is both empirically defensible and analytically useful”. In presenting the book’s view of anarchism as a “highly unusual”, he ended up having to present the views of pretty much all major anarchists and syndicalist activists and movements as “highly unusual” forms of anarchism, and to do this through the use of loaded rhetoric. Below, I include first the review, followed by the refutation: Anarchist Studies 18.1, pp. 113–115 Michael Schmidt and Lucien van der Walt, Black Flame: The Revolutionary Class Politics of Anarchism and Syndicalism , Edinburgh & Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2009 Black Flame is an intriguing and infuriating work which deserves to be read and debated. Rich in both theory and history, the authors say their conclusions are ‘quite striking’ and result in a ‘rethinking’ of the anarchist canon (p.17). Furthermore, they very fairly say that ‘if this book succeeds in promoting new research into anarchism, even if that research contradicts our arguments, we consider our work well done’ (pp.26–7). However, the particularities of the argument, and the tone in which they are presented, distract from the possibilities of serious discussion regarding many of the book’s stances. Of particular interest is the last chapter, which is the best assemblage of research I have encountered on classical anarchism’s complex relationship to questions of nationalism, imperialism and race. Black Flame’s stress on the rich anarchist and syndicalist traditions in Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean serves as a ‘crucial corrective to Eurocentric accounts’ (p.21). Also of much interest is the careful explanation of the differences between different syndicalist unions. Black Flame is also important in that it situates anarchism in its social and historical context. The authors argue that the notion of anarchism as a timeless part of human existence originates in Paul Eltzbacher’s 1900 book Anarchism . It is only afterwards that anarchists themselves (especially Kropotkin) incorporate this idea into their own beliefs. Black Flame notes that ‘if anarchism is a universal feature of society, then it becomes difficult indeed to explain why it arises, or to place it in historical context, to delineate its boundaries, and analyze its class character and role at a part…
