---
title: "The Domination Of The Text"
author: "John Clark"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-clark-the-domination-of-the-text"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Morris’s Reading of The Impossible Community"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "john-clark-the-domination-of-the-text.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/john-clark-the-domination-of-the-text.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Struggle Over Class Struggle        The Struggle Over The Strugglers        Three Or More Cheers For Democracy        The Roots Of Misinterpretation        Sometimes Our Heroes Turn Out To Be Assholes: Addendum On A Famous Philosopher        Author Biography Never judge a title by its book seems to be a guiding precept for Brian Morris. The title, he says, is ‘a complete misnomer, and quite misleading. Communities (or societies) are not “impossible”, nor are they “spooks”, for they have a real existence…’. In fact, the title, The Impossible Community: Realizing Communitarian Anarchism , was chosen to indicate that a certain kind of community that is thought to be ‘impossible’ can in fact be realised. It echoes Bakunin’s statement about being ‘an impossible person’ (though he did in fact exist!) and the famous May ‘68 slogan about ‘being realistic and demanding the impossible ’. If Morris missed the irony of the title, he might have gotten a clue by reading chapter one, which discusses precisely the meaning of the title. That chapter (which should perhaps be called ‘Impossibility for Dummies’) begins with a discussion of various kinds of possibilities and impossibilities, including the one alluded to in the title, in which something that is defined as impossible according to the dominant ideology and imaginary is in fact possible . Despite all this, Morris presents a work written on behalf of regenerated human and ecological communities as a rejection of the very possibility of community. He even implies that I advocate Stirner’s idea that society is nothing more than a ‘spook’ (a pernicious abstraction). Yet, I’ve written an entire book attacking Stirnerite egoism and nihilism, and continue to argue vehemently against such views in debates with anarcho-Stirnerites. So, Morris’s polemic has a rather inauspicious beginning. Unfortunately, things begin to go rather precipitously downhill from there. Morris depicts me as an enemy of class struggle anarchists, ignoring the many discussions in The Impossible Community of the importance of class analysis and class politics. In a rather sad attempt to manufacture evidence of my supposed anti-class struggle views, he claims that I refer only once to Malatesta, because he was an ‘ordinary working bloke’. Morris somehow managed to glean this bit of trivia thumbing through the index, while overlooking the rather conspicuous fact that there are 117 page-references to ‘labor’, ‘labor organization’, ‘anarcho-syndicalism’, ‘workers’, and ‘self-management’, and another 134 page-references to ‘capitalism’, ‘production’, and ‘exploitation’. In fact, there is abundant evidence in this book and elsewhere, that I take class issues very seriously. The Impossible Community reflects a decade of heavy involvement in struggles regarding West Papua, Indonesian neo-colonialism, and U.S. corporate imperialism. Work on such issues convinced me of the need to revise class theory in relation to the changing world system. The book was also profoundly shaped by my city’s post-Hurricane Katrina experience with disaster capitalism (and disaster statism), including exploitative pitting of African-American workers against migrant workers from Latin-America. Since close members of my family are refugees from the legacy of war and imperialism in Central America, and we live here on the edge between global core and periphery, these issues are an everyday reality. I note the traumatic crisis for the Western left resulting from the convergence of class politics and the realities of globalisation, and its need to confront current transformations. I remark that ‘we might reflect on the fact that perhaps one-third, if not more, of the population of El Salvador now lives in the United States’ and that ‘class struggle has been called “struggle” for a reason. As “America” globalizes itself into the world, the world globalizes itself into “America” – whether “America” likes it or not’ (pp. 44–45). My growing awarene…
