---
title: "Federalism, Socialism, Antidemagogism"
author: "René Berthier"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rene-berthier-federalism-socialism-antidemagogism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translator unknown. The following text is a slightly modified version of an article published in Le Monde Libertaire in 1984."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rene-berthier-federalism-socialism-antidemagogism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rene-berthier-federalism-socialism-antidemagogism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Fragmented Self-Management        Taking Power Back From the Machines        Libertarian Federalism The concept of self-management is in itself rather confusing. Outside the libertarian [1] movement, the term is usually interpreted simply in the sense of separate management of factories by collectives of workers. This conception makes the social economy a fragmentation of production units that are autonomous from each other and possibly in competition with each other. Authors who insist on the term self-management often stop at the idea that the relationships of work, hierarchy, etc., within enterprises are not neutral and that they are indicative of the nature of the overall system in which we find ourselves. In this we are in full agreement. They also try to demonstrate by as many examples as possible that workers, collectively, are capable of managing companies. On the first point, history has sufficiently demonstrated that workers are capable of organising production in a company, but it seems more important to insist on their capacity to organise society as a whole. Limited to the management of the enterprise, self-management is not socialist if we understand socialism to mean the abolition of private ownership of the means of production, of wage labour and of the market economy and the collective determination of the orientations of society. Self-management limited to the management of the enterprise by the workers implies that the latter organise their work entirely autonomously, but also that they determine autonomously, at the level of their production unit, the allocation of surplus product, the allocation of income, investments, etc. But if such a situation can give workers the illusion of holding decision-making power, it does not transform capitalist relations of production. We will simply have a capitalism where companies will have a somewhat particular mode of management, but where all the mechanisms of capitalism will be maintained, in particular the market economy and wage labour. Market economy means that investments will be allocated to sectors with high and fast profitability, to the detriment of socially useful but unprofitable sectors. The fact that companies are self-managed, if the foundations of capitalism are maintained – the market economy and wage-system – will not prevent these companies from prioritising investment in sectors where they will maximise their profits, regardless of social needs. If each company, after the usual tax, wage and social deductions, retains the disposal of the surplus product, we find ourselves in the same situation as the individual entrepreneur who will try to implement all the proven methods to increase profits and eliminate competition. Competition between companies will divide the workers, because fragmented self-management, which is only a development of the cooperative system in a market economy, places the workers in front of the usual choices of any capitalist management: rationalise, accelerate the rhythm of production to face up to competition, lay off; eventually, the workers will be able to democratically grant themselves sub-wages. This amounts to self-management of one’s own exploitation. Already, within today’s capitalist society, there are “self-managed” enterprises – the workers’ production cooperatives. No matter how exemplary their internal functioning, they bend themselves to the laws of the market. This is a necessity. In order to survive, they are obliged to be created in sectors where it is possible to make a profit, because it is a characteristic of capitalism that the criterion that determines the creation of an enterprise is the making of a profit. Consequently, whether it is cooperatives in today’s capitalism, or self-management in a pseudo-socialism of enterprises, the criterion for determining investments will be profitability, not social utility. For example; it is true that today there are “wild”, “parental” or “autonomous” crèches, w…
