---
title: "Against Self-Work"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-against-self-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A critique of care as a form of labor"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-against-self-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-against-self-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Life as a Form of Work      The Self as an Occupation      Emotional Capital and Emotional Labor      Self-Care and Self-Destruction      What Words Can Do To Us      Less Work More Revenge "It is worth asking, do we presume to attack the mega-structures of State and Capital without changing the relations between ourselves and the tasks that go along with this — questioning the dominant concepts of time and rhythm, of survival and life, of symbol and reality?” - Social War, Antisocial Tension In Bædan 2: A Queer Journal of Heresy the writers discuss a popular anthropological theory that people in pre-civilization spent very few hours of the day doing work. The writers in Bædan go on to push against this notion and argue that the effort necessary to survive was just a part of life and wasn't conceptualized as work. Work and play may have had very little distinction, if any. Yet today capitalism's indoctrination of work runs deep as it attempts to impose itself on every living creature in hopes of its perpetuation. One of its forms of latching onto life that I find increasingly discomforting is the concept of Self-Work. Today, the use of self-work may be easily recognizable; it has come to be associated with putting energy into processing trauma, complicated emotions, difficult situations, insecurities and mistakes often as an effort to change. It seems to me though that when intertwining these important practices with the idea of work — a concept created by and forced onto people — capitalism finds a way to live on. It's as if putting in a few hours guarantees results and that work makes things better. Yet work is that very structure that gives a home to so much stress, trauma and thrives by stifling the joy in life. Work is static. It's rigid, forced, and inherently wrought with imbalanced power dynamics. On the other hand, introspection and a conversation with oneself or another person is every intangible possibility; it takes no shape or form, it's alive. The same can be said about healing and the same for brokenness. They overlap, there's no clear end and beginning but an enmeshing kind of like being in a body of water and every passing wave made up from parts of all of it. I was having a conversation around self-work with a friend who brought up the ways in which early and late stage capitalism operate. In early stage capitalism, people who were employed as wage workers clocked in and out of work, and in this way their waged work didn't follow them home. Yet in late stage capitalism, work seeks one out at every moment — from all the unpaid hours of labor it tends to rack up, to the stress of instability that may follow one after they leave their place of work. Work even then bleeds into how one conceptualizes the navigation of emotional terrain; the self becoming its own occupation. Self-work, too, seemingly comes with a sort of clocking in/out of its own or having a time and place in which it’s done. In conversation around my or others’ need for growth, it’s often said that one just needs to do the work, as though it simply requires sitting down and getting to it. To me this implies the ways one could benefit from changing only calls for one to go to work – and the disconcerting assumption that work is something we all inherently know how to do. This has been made true for many people through a lifetime of being forced into waged labor, but it seems to be a way of capitalism normalizing work as natural to life. The concept of self-work itself leads us along a slippery slope in the name of progress and bettering oneself or, even more alarming, accumulating emotional capital . This last concept, of being “rich in emotional capital,” has been explained by psychologist Paul Thagard as “high in self-esteem, self-regulation, emotional energy, attachment, resilience, agreeableness, and optimism.” This idea of emotional accumulation diminishes the way that processing trauma, mistakes, and insecurities are a lifelong process.…
