---
title: "Capitalism is losing its Barings?"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/iain-macsaorsa-capitalism-is-losing-its-barings"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This first appeared in Scottish Anarchist Number 2 (1995) and was written in response to the collapse of Barings Bank. It discusses the issues associated for anarchists and labour with the increased globalisation of capitalism. Some slight changes have been made to fix typos and add references. Retr"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "iain-macsaorsa-capitalism-is-losing-its-barings.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/iain-macsaorsa-capitalism-is-losing-its-barings.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       “A level of poverty is sound monetarist policy” (John Pilger)        Free Market, Centralised State        Back to the Future?        References and Further Reading To lose £75 pounds on the horses is unfortunate. To lose £750 million pounds is slightly different. When Nick Leeson lost 750 million on the Tokyo futures market in February, it should have raised more than eyebrows or smiles from anarchists. It should have raised questions. Barings “misfortunes” have highlighted the issue of economic power and the fundamental changes in the nature of capitalism which we have all had the unpleasant pleasure of experiencing since the 1970’s. These changes have important implications for us, our activities and our lives and so must be understood. As should be obvious to any anarchist, capitalist companies and corporations, by their economic power, control political power, namely the state and in particular Parliament and the executive (i.e. the government). Political power is often powerless in the face of opposition from economic power. As Noam Chomsky notes, “In capitalist democracy, the interests that must be satisfied are those of capitalists; otherwise, there is no investment, no production, no work, no resources to be devoted, however marginally, to the needs of the general population” ( Turning the Tide , Pluto, 1985, page 233). Faced with a government aiming to implement “radical” policies (i.e., anything that will get up the noses of capital) and “deliver for the needs of working class people” capital would use its economic power to stop or undermine these reforms. How? Simply by moving capital to more profitable countries. It’s this economic power that the recent changes within capitalism has increased. The tendency within capital is for it to become increasingly global in its operations. Transnational Companies are, perhaps, the most well known representatives of this process. Globalisation became noticeable in the early 1970’s, partly as a response to popular revolt (the “crisis in democracy” to use the elites term) and partly as the natural evolution of the system. As would be imagined, the political reactions to this process took similar forms in different countries as the underlying economic causes were similar. The U.S. eliminated many capital controls, the controls having been, as John Eatwell the Cambridge economist put it, “challenged as ‘inefficient’ and ‘against the national interest’ and ‘unmarketlike’ – and the infrastructure of speculation was rapidly expanded” meaning that “opportunities for profit proliferated” by allowing capital formally invested in high labour cost industries in the U.S.A. to move to states with lower costs (John Eatwell, “The Global Money Trap”, American Prospects , Winter 1993). In Britain, “Heath… had relaxed many of the controls on the banks in the U.K.” (Robin Ramsay, page 2). Both countries floated their currencies (Nixon first, closely followed by Heath). This meant the end of the Bretton Wood system. The end, in other words, of the post-war economic system. The long-term effect of this has been the reversal of the ratio between foreign exchange transactions of a speculative nature and those for the finance of trade and long term investment. In 1971, the former was about 10%, the latter about 90%. By 1993, speculative transactions stood at 90% of the total. (Eatwell, op. cit.) In Britain, the immediate effect was that between December 1971 and December 1974, the total assets of British Banks rose by £48 339 million, or 131%. “‘Printing money’ with a vengeance”(Robin Ramsay, page 2). This resulted in inflation reaching 20% just before Heath left power. [1] The reasons for this have been indicated above, but the subjective factor, namely popular revolt, without doubt accelerated the evolution to globalisation (as it had the evolution to “national” capitalism, or the post war Keynesianism consensus of limited state intervention [2] ). The major problem of the post-war consensus…
