---
title: "Attentat"
author: "Miguel Amorós, Anonymous"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-attentat"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A journal of collision"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "various-authors-attentat.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/various-authors-attentat.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     editorial      Art of nothing        Laying Plans        Waging War        Attack by Stratagem        Attack by fire        Spies        Situations      The Black Banner (Черное Знамия)      A critique OF critique        I        II        III        IV        V        VI        VII        VIII        IX      A Howl Against Marx        Not a critique        Sociology        Economics        Political Philosophy        A Howl      Professional Anarchy and Theoretical Disarmament: On Insurrectionalism      Insurrectionary Anarchism as Activism        1        2        3        4        5      History as Decomposition        §1        §2        §3        §4        §5        §6        §7        §8        §9        §10        §11        §12        §13        §14      Attentat – Nihilism as Strategy II        materialism        violence        whose ironic muscle is the biggest        the continuing appeal of hope        three point plan          I.          II.          III.        attentat It must be emphasized from the outset that nihilism is an ambivalent concept with more than one meaning. It is, in one guise, a promise of creative destruction. In another, it can work to the opposite end; turn to sheer destruction, annihilating the very context of creativity. The two-in-one nature of nihilism moves it, in a way, ‘beyond good and evil’. —Bulent Diken, ( Nihilism , 6) If this project had been completed eight years ago (when it was originally promised), it would have began with the word and all the thinking would’ve focused on a single point. At that time we still considered anarchist thinking to be unnecessarily positivist and in need of our correction. Some venerable factions still criticize us along the line that we are overly negative, but if they are honest they admit they share our lack of hope. They just call it something else. At its simplest, this journal explores the collision between anarchist and nihilist ideas. Because the position—with conclusions drawn from direct experience—emphasizes the collision rather than the words, it presents more of an aesthetic than merely a political stance. For too long we have suffered the limitations of words and identities, without gaining the corresponding heft-of-meaning or followers that seemed to be the hallmark of big ideas in the 19 th and 20 th century. Now, unlike eight years ago, we recognize that the words aren’t important in the same way as they used to be in past. While an attentat is indeed an act of political violence, we don’t see the word as either a flag or a mission statement. Instead we see an attentat as a leap from one reality to another. As a kind of passionate will to live that we rarely see and cannot imagine today. This is a time of existential alienation, not chestthumping bravery. Today’s political violence, much like the political whatever, is just a marketing program of the security state, one that bears no relationship to a life worth living. So it follows that we don’t defend the 19 th century attentat as a 21 st Century solution to all that ails us. To the extent that echoes of the attentat exist in the modern world, we understand it as a natural response of an individual under extreme duress to a world that doesn’t care about them, their condition, their family, or their future—but an individual who still has the self respect to do something about it. A futile something, sure, but something far different than a protest vote or an argument over the dinner table. A new definition of attentat would be an act, any act really, that does not concern itself with causeand-effect but with inspiration: not the inspiration of the song or a revelation of a higher power but of the overloading of a moment with the kind of aggregation of feelings that transforms a moment into a lifetime. The attentat would be the creation, by participation, of these kinds of moments, to imbue the moment with eternity without regard to time or periodization. It is the act of leap…
