---
title: "Bring The Swords, Storm the Palaces"
author: "Haraami"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/haraami-bring-the-swords-storm-the-palaces"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Partisans of Color Position"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "haraami-bring-the-swords-storm-the-palaces.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/haraami-bring-the-swords-storm-the-palaces.epub"
    hosted: false
---

In recent years, conversations among certain non-white and non-Western revolutionaries have been growing and deepening. We have encountered each other at gatherings, actions, workshops, assemblies, and the frontlines of insurrectionary upheavals, where we have begun to articulate our frustration with the existing political frameworks on offer for “people like us,” and expressed a desire for another language, another orientation. Over the last year, this process of encounter and articulation has been accelerated by panels [1] and new writing, which have opened up new conversations and connections amongst those of us seeking to move beyond our current impasses. As these conversations have grown, we find that more and more people are drawn into them, finding something resonant which they have been waiting for. We — those of us who have been having these conversations in our own heads, amongst friends, in side conversations, phone calls, panel discussions, and written word — want to meet more fellow travelers and deepen our thinking, to begin forging another kind of politics together. To that end, the following intervention aims to more clearly articulate the situation we find ourselves in, and, most importantly, what it is that we hope to advance towards, together. There is a void in existing non-white and non-western revolutionary thought in the United States. What has filled this void is BIPOC radicalism, a set of tendencies, patterns of acting and feeling, and ideologies which falsely claim to represent all non-white and western revolutionary perspectives. [2] Contrary to its pretensions, this genre of radical politics in fact serves as a brake on revolutionary activity, above all on that of non-white people. Existing BIPOC radicalisms oscillate between two poles: racial identitarianism and militant political identity . The first pole, racial identitarianism , refers to a genre of “radical-liberal” politics: radical in its analysis and critique of race, the state, capital, nonprofits, etc., but ultimately liberal in practice. In these circles, revolutionary practices, and the messiness, complexity, and risk they entail, are sterilized and suppressed. Rather than accepting the risk of danger that a revolutionary movement demands, this tendency embraces a liberal politics of safety that erases and suppresses non-white militancy. At the same time, it rallies around reassuring fictions of an essentialized racial identity stripped of internal differences. If such fictions are needed, this is because they justify practices of “centering” specific identities presumed to be the most oppressed, while demanding deference from everyone else. The lived experience of the oppressed is reduced to a homogenous abstraction from which a presumptively shared set of political desires is extracted. An underlying politics of scarcity and competition drives conflicts over who has the “right to speak” in political spaces, as if an individual’s politics were fully determined by their positionality. Such radical liberalism reduces structural forces to a matter of one’s overdetermined positionality, measuring an individual’s radicality by the ability to perform this positionality, to name their victimization. By contrast, a revolutionary perspective must recenter resistance, agency, and power, by insisting that white supremacy is a political force composed of institutions, infrastructures, and ways of being that can be destroyed and deactivated through collective revolutionary activity. By reducing politics to the management of interpersonal dynamics and decentering revolutionary agency, the slide towards trauma management produces endless negative cycles of people-pleasing, victimization, powerlessness, and conflict spirals among BIPOC and allies alike. The second pole could be characterized as a non-white racialized militant political identity . While more engaged in militant and revolutionary practices, this tendency still remains trapped by limits o…
