---
title: "CARI"
author: "LydiettCarrión"
date: "2013"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lydiettcarrion-cari"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An interview to the Mexican organization Células Autónomas de la Revolución Inmediata"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lydiettcarrion-cari.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lydiettcarrion-cari.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Translation Note: This interview to this Mexican clandestine organization Células Autónomas de la Revolución Inmediata (CARI) [1] that was published just now November 2011, was taken more than a year ago. It can be noticed by the facts that it relates to, as for example, the references to the Greek situation. It’s an interview that was getting bored on my computer. First I proposed it to a magazine, soon the time was short for its delivery. Then I was working on other issues. Now, that the media start again to speak about anarchists in the Distrito Federal (Federal District – Mexico City), I think to be appropriate to take the dust out from the interview and to present it (without any edition), before it gets again buried in my working disorder. I clarify that there were two questions that CARI choose not to answer. One about its positioning, closeness or distance towards groups with Marxist lines. The other will be kept as private information. – According to what I have read in your communiques, you are the group that is closest to an anarchism that goes towards the social movements. You don’t necessarily claim the concept of eco-anarchism, which would be (apparently) the most popular one amongst the Mexican youth that chose to embrace that ideology. Yes in that case we can say that we, the CARI-PGG, are an clandestine organization that is organized based on affinity, practicing and promoting a collectivist-individualist-individualist-collectivist anarchism; for, to us, there’s no difference between these two postures because we think that they feedback each other by themselves. For us it’s important to exist a social organization that is founded in the libertarian principles of organization and to this organization not to get stuck in slogans and demanding protests; but to radicalize itself in a way to derive in an organization that doesn’t struggle for reforms; but, starting from the base and from the “now and here”, makes an effort to build an autonomous and free world. [Is to say, that implements the] autonomy at the individual and community level but also has the will to destroy the present state of things, that is nothing more nothing less than the capitalism’s dictatorship. We should build that organization and that free world, not with empty speeches as if we were some kind of politician, but on the opposite should be constructed in practice itself, in the daily life, starting from the individual change; is to say, throwing away from our persons the vices of the society, like machismo, sexism, homophobia, authoritarianism, etc. not teaching but rather impulsing and contributing to a real change. On the other hand, for us, is as well of main importance, the destruction of what oppresses us, of what exploits us and tries to transform us in its slaves of capital and its social vices, in slaves of work, of the bourgeois morality. It’s important for us to impulse the collective insurrection, as well as to practice our individual insurrection, because we are not willing to keep on bearing their humiliations, their tortures, their hits, their commodified world, because we know that each vengeful attack against the police and their institutions is a solidarity attack with the ones that are behind bars due to fight, independently the reason why they are imprisoned, each attack is a clear message to the powerful that each abuse, torture, imprisonment or destruction of nature will be given back with the same strength. Are over time giving the other cheek to receive the second slap. That construction and that destruction depends of our effort. About why we don’t call ourselves eco-anarchists. It’s because we decided to claim ourselves solely as anarchists as the group’s general identity, although we are also concerned about the destruction of nature, in these times the ecologist struggle also was converted into a motto or a social struggle, as an example the struggle against the metro’s line 12, the struggle against west highway …
