---
title: "Against Multiculturalism"
author: "Hakim Bey"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-against-multiculturalism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "“Let a thousand flowers bloom”"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "peter-lamborn-wilson-against-multiculturalism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-lamborn-wilson-against-multiculturalism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The USA was always supposed to be a “melting pot.” Canada, by contrast, calls itself a “mosaic”, which may explain why Canadians seem to suffer a kind of long-drawn-out and perpetual identity crisis. What does it mean to be “Canadian” as opposed to (or as well as) Quebecois, Celt, or Native? In the 1950s the USA was supposed to be immune to such headaches. All cultures would “melt” and fuse into the American character, the main stream. In truth, however, this “consensus” culture was simply English colonial culture with amnesia, and a faded patina of frontier bluster. Immigrant cultures which resisted meltdown were considered simply abnormal; the Irish, for example, were viewed as savage recalcitrants until quite recently. Of course it was hard to tell if certain cultures remained “outside” because they wanted to or because they were excluded. In the 1960s blacks were identified as an unfairly excluded culture, and steps were taken to absorb them into the mainstream (through school integration for example). Native Americans were still excluded by law, which defines them by blood rather than by culture, and maintains “segregation” by the reservation system. Jews, Hispanics, Asians, each followed their own trajectory toward assimilation or resistance. By the late 1970s or early 1980s it became obvious that the Melting Pot had somehow failed. Black culture, the test case, now appeared impossible to absorb. The “consensus” was in danger. The Right, with its schizophrenic attitudes toward race and culture, had faltered. A new “liberal” consensus was proposed. It was called multiculturalism. Let there be no mistake: multiculturalism is a strategy designed to save “America” as an idea, and as a system of social control. Each of the many cultures that make up the nation are now to be allowed a little measure of self-identity and a few simulacra of autonomy. School textbooks now reflect this strategy, with 1950s illustrations of happy historical whites retouched to include a few blacks, Asians and even Natives. A dozen or so departments of multiculturalism spring up at university level. Each minority must now be treated with “dignity” in the curriculum. Conservatives raise a stink: the Canonical Shibboleths of Western Civilization are in danger! Our children will be forced to study … black history! This babble on the Right lends multiculturalism an aura of “radical” righteousness and political correctitude, and the Left leaps forward to defend the new paradigm. In the middle according to theory — balance will be restored, and the consensus will function again. The trouble is that the theory itself emanates neither from the Right nor Left nor Center. It emanates from the top. It’s a theory of control. The old textbooks depicted all ethnic/cultural particularity as a taint which could only be overcome in the great pot of conformity to the Norm. Yet the Norm was itself so clearly and simply a form of hegemonic particularism that the textbooks wore thin and eventually grew transparent. They had to go — I agree. Now we have a few texts which admit, for example, that Columbus was a mixed blessing and that Africans were not morally responsible for being slaves. This is a step forward — I agree. However, I remain interested in knowing precisely who has given us permission to hold such opinions — and why ? In the first place, it seems obvious that each of the “many” particular cultures is being measured against or assimilated to a mainstream “universal” culture. The only difference is that the mainstream now, apparently, values a bit of “diversity,” and feels a bit of permissible nostalgia for colorful ethnic customs. At the heart of the discourse however, the very discourse which now defines itself as “multicultural”, there remains a “solid core curriculum” made up of the same old Euro-rationalist axiomata, scientistic triumphalism, and ruling-class teleology. This mainstream constitutes Civilization, and only on the periphery of this centralit…
