---
title: "Hope in the Collapse"
author: "Punch Up * Kick Down Distro"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hope-in-the-collapse"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "&lt;punchupkickdowndistro.bandcamp.com/album/hope-in-the-collapse&gt;"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "hope-in-the-collapse.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hope-in-the-collapse.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/hope-in-the-collapse)

I thought about how for thousands of years there have been people who told us that things can’t go on like this From Jesus Christ to the Diggers, from Malthus to Zerzan, from Karl Marx to Huey Newton but this shit goes on and on and on and on and on.

We are living through a moment unprecedented in human history. No amount of scientific data or apocalyptic rhetoric can fully portray the all-encompassing nature of the ecological and social crises humanity is facing. Biodiversity loss, deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, ocean acidification, sea level rise, increasing global temperature, mass extinction of plant and animal species, and intensifying extreme weather events are each major crises unto themselves. These are all happening at once, interrelated and compounding. Research suggests that heat waves, coastal flooding, and drought will make the land areas where n early half of the global population lives uninhabitable by 2050. What’s more — predictions and projections about the climate regularly underestimate how quickly these changes are occurring, and how intense the fallout will be. “These are not the paranoid delusions of a religious fanatic. This is promised weekly in reports on the accelerating climate apocalypse.” [15]

This crisis is given a variety of labels –“climate change” or “global warming”, among others — but a changing climate is only one aspect of a world-wide ecological shift and its knock on socio-political effects. The term “polycrisis” expresses how these are all overlapping, but we lack the language to fully describe a series of crises so vast, which is part of the problem; our minds cannot fully comprehend something so totalizing. In her book Generation Dread, Brittany Way notes,

It is impossible to think about as a contained phenomenon. By not seeing where [it] starts or ends, we don’t know how or where to intervene to cause meaningful change. [1]

It is, however, not difficult to imagine what the future holds – wars over clean water, heavily militarized borders, increasingly displaced impoverished peoples — because these are simply further intensifications of the current social order. Intensified levels of wealth consolidation, housing insecurity, forced migration, and the utter disposability of human lives which no longer serves an economic function are all but certain. Desperate attempts to survive will be further criminalized while popular resistance and collective action against these conditions will continue to provoke increasingly violent responses from the henchmen of the ruling class – the police. The fascistic aggression and xenophobic nationalism which is on the rise represents the worst case scenario for how our society responds to these crises. “If the public at large accepts preventable mass deaths as inevitable, the system will maintain itself.” [10] Bummer, right? Not a lot of fun to talk about at parties.

As Naomi Klein has alluded to, it’s not just getting hotter, it’s getting more cruel, more hostile, more difficult to secure material and emotional stability. The acceleration of these crises will result in social upheaval and resource scarcity far greater than we experience today. In this zine, I refer to this this crisis of crises – ecological as well as socio-political – simply as the Collapse .

The intersecting emergencies we face are the result of how our society is organized. The Collapse is not simply an ecological crisis, then, but also a social one. It is a crucial misstep to divorce crises “environmental” issues from their social and political causes. The Collapse is not occurring in a vacuum, but as a consequence of a colonial capitalist social structure which rules the world. The logics of capitalism and colonialism are the ideological foundation for the collapse: exploitation of labor and land, the genocide and displacement of indigenous peoples, and the massive hoarding of wealth and resources by the ruling class. “The pursuit of money is the driving force, uncontrolled and uncontrollable, behind global warming and the destruction of the environment.” [3]

Cynical claims that the Collapse is merely the result of “human nature” – that people are inherently greedy or incapable of a balanced relationship with the natural world – come either from ignorance or bad faith. This line of thinking is a “continuation of colonial racism” [4] and insulting to indigenous struggles against colonial domination worldwide. Likewise, the notion that “overpopulation” is to blame for the Collapse fails to recognize that the global population’s basic needs could be met, but are denied because of a colonial/capitalist global order. The fact that enough food is produced to feed the global population several times over, yet millions are subjected to starvation, proves this point.

The largest contributors to the ecological crisis – fossil fuel extraction, increasing carbon emissions, the military industrial complex, agricultural mismanagement, sweeping deforestation, and so on – continue, despite their disastrous effects, because they are profitable to the corporate and state entities which have captured global power. At the same time, social crises of political instability, psychological distress, incredible wealth inequality, and growing populations of climate refugees are downstream effects of a global order structed by capital interest.

The Collapse is experienced unequally depending on economic status and geography, as the result of a highly unequal, globalized class society. David Camfield writes in Future on Fire that “as the climate changes, social arrangements will determine how many people will die and who they will be.” He continues,

How a society is organized is fundamental to how climate change effects people. Poverty makes this obvious If during a heat wave you can’t get enough drinkable water and access to a cool space because you can’t pay for them, your chances of survival are generally much lower … The same is true when it comes to climate change and migration. As rising waters, drought, and other effects drive more people to move, the impact on people will vary depending on their wealth and power … such things are decided by how societies are organized, not by the climate. [32]

While many people are aware of the systemic injustices of our society and are fed up with the corruption of the socially powerful and the hyper wealthy, the social mechanisms for enacting change have lost all legitimacy, fully captured by capital. The primary function of modern political structures is to serve the financial interests of the ruling class and maintain the status quo. “Research has established that just a couple hundred companies are responsible for 71% of the world’s carbon emissions, a process in which the vast majority of humanity has very little say.” [14] It is well documented that fossil fuel companies spend incredible sums of money to push a narrative about ecological crisis that points the blame away from the structural and institutional causes of the Collapse and towards the individual responsibilities of consumers. Recycling or using paper straws does literally nothing to address the systemic causes of the Collapse, and the belief that consumer habits are in any way meaningful only reinforces the neoliberal ideology which proposes that the only terrain for struggle is within the parameters of consumer choice. Similarly, without addressing the roots of social instability, political illegitimacy, and psychological misery – that is, capitalist ideology and its psycho-social structures – “sustainable” energy or “green” policies will only buy more time for further exploitation of labor and land.

While corporate institutions and colonial governments may appear indifferent to, or in denial of the climate crisis, the powerful understand the Collapse as a very real threat to their own status and safety. The ruling class is indifferent to the suffering of the populations who will bear the brunt of the Collapse, but they are diligent in shoring up their own private financial interests while further insulating themselves from the growing numbers of desperate and impoverished people in heavily guarded compounds and bunkers. The entities most responsible for the Collapse will be the last to experience its horrors. While growing numbers of people – unable or unwilling to participate in a delusional and destructive economic and social system – experience a declining standard of living, the hyper-wealthy “will live an affluent life in gated communities protected by security forces, whilst the majority of people live in relative poverty, in degraded and unpleasant environments.” [13] Sound familiar?

“Unless the root ideologies and structures that precipitated this crises are confronted and done away with we condemn ourselves and future generations to nonexistence.” [8] It is not only the economic model of capitalism fueling the Collapse, but the psychological and social worlds built upon its logic . Capitalist ideology is pervasive in our culture, so normalized that it goes unnoticed. Even if we reject the status quo as individuals, we are still forced to obey its logic – forced to labor for a wage in order to gain access to life’s basic necessities. In order to survive, we have to adhere to the logic of capital, no matter how corrosive it may be on our psychological or physical health. Those unable or unwilling to adjust to the status quo are pushed to the societal margins, punished with carceral violence, or struggle with addiction as a way to cope with despair.

It Is, therefore, not enough to intellectually acknowledge that capitalism is morally corrupt or socially inadequate, we must act as if its continuation is a threat to all life on earth – because it is . As long as we are dependent on, obedient to, and conditioned by capitalist ideology – and made to adhere to its exploitative conditions to stay alive — we will be fundamentally incapable of confronting the Collapse. A wicked problem, a vicious cycle. If humanity is to have any chance of a future which is not utterly deprived, we must see capitalism as the pernicious force that it is in order to collectively dismantle it. This dynamic, as Umair Muhammad reminds us, makes clear that

it Is not Idealistic to seek to overcome [capitalism]. It Is In fact idealistic and impractical to expect capitalism to eventually become sufficiently reformed. Pragmatism is on the side of those who realize that capitalism must be overcome if we want to live in a sufficiently just world – indeed, if we want to have a world to live in at all. [5]

While a worldwide transition to renewable energy and away from fossil fuels is an absolute necessity, “sustainable capitalism” is a contradiction in terms because capitalism relies on a prioritization of profit, infinite extraction, labor exploitation, and ecological destruction. Any attempt to confront the Collapse without confronting capitalism as an economic model and social paradigm is to make meaningless reforms and marginal adjustments to a death machine. As long as we refuse to name colonial capitalism as the fundamental problem, we are “mystifying, and, as with all mystifications, supporting the status quo.” [7] We cannot “fix” the climate without dismantling an economic system which relies on continued expansion and extraction. We cannot effectively confront the Collapse without uprooting the underlying assumptions that colonialism has naturalized. As long as we are functioning under a capitalist economy, there will be no environmental or ethical considerations that stand in the way of profit.

If you’re reading these words, perhaps you’re in a similar position as I am, as I write them. At once “privileged” in the context of the Collapse – in that access to food, water, and shelter are not matters of acute scarcity – but also living in a state of constant acute stress, always just getting by financially, navigating increasing costs of living while also grappling with a deep existential dread about what the future may hold. For many working class people faced with the challenges of acquiring secure housing, navigating the healthcare system, and affording food, the Collapse seems like an abstract problem that takes place in some far distant future. People have no capacity for grappling with the big picture problems of social injustice, ecological devastation, or global economics when the daily grind is leaves them financially stressed and emotionally depleted. In a state of constant overwhelm, the “climate” is experienced as just another thing to worry about while simultaneously so insurmountable as to leave one powerless to do anything about . In Disenchanted Earth , Richard Seymour describes this dilemma.

One would think, given the scale of the challenge, that there should be emergency public meetings in every village, town and city every week to thrash out solutions. Instead, given the pervasive sense of powerlessness and futility, the most common response is what psychoanalysts call ‘disavowal’: I know perfectly well that things can’t go on this way, but because life is hard enough and I have bills to pay, I behave as if I don’t. [14]

The desire to numb out or simply ignore reality is understandable, but behind that aversion there is a sort of omnipresent, vague fear which has “structural causes and therefore cannot be linked back to concrete events.” [18] Suspicion, confusion, and ideological manipulation create a kind of fog, rendering everything uncertain beyond comprehension. Facing these issues and their complex, entangled, pervasive and systemic causes, it is reasonable to fall into a deep despair that makes all action or hope feel pointless and naïve.

The world is confusing and frightening. We cannot thrust headlong into action without processing these emotions. We cannot take a shortcut to a better world without also grieving the loss and despair we are feeling in the present. Emotions inspire us towards movement, action, connection, and understanding. They can also be debilitating if they are not properly confronted, expressed, and processed. This can be particularly challenging in a society that is so averse to discomfort, and in a frantic political atmosphere which demands constant engagement and disincentivizes reflection. Britt Way gives voice to the importance of emotional processing in her book Generation Dread :

Despair and Fear are not inherently bad. Hope and optimism are not inherently good … Emotions are what often lead people to act. It is possible that feelings of ecological anxiety and grief, although uncomfortable, are in fact the crucible through which humanity must pass to harness the energy and conviction that are needed for the lifesaving changes now required. [1]

While understanding the stakes of our situation and having a clear analysis of the root cause is critical, going through life in a constant panic is not an effective tactic for motivating action. “No fact is so shocking or profound that its utterance will spontaneously spark a movement.” [10] It is people’s lived experience that shapes their understanding of the world, more than political theories, data, statistics, reason, moral judgment, or apocalyptic forecasts. Eco-distress can be a real problem when it stunts our ability to take care of ourselves, connect with others, and join up in action. However, when that distress is properly processed in a collective context it can deepen our resolve and reignite a sense of purpose.

We cannot lose sight of the urgency with which we must act, but we also mustn’t skip over the real grief and anxiety we are confronting. To harbor deep seated fear about the future is absolutely justifiable, and we shouldn’t deny those emotions or attempt to shut them out. However, if fear dominates our spirit and motivates our behavior, we become paralyzed and more prone to dissociation, alienation, loneliness, and distrust of others. Hope, in contrast, arms us with a trust and closeness — a belief in each other, and our collective power.

It is easy to roll our eyes at words like “hope.” But cynicism and detachment can be a pacifying excuse not to try, not to care – because caring is terrifying, especially in such extreme uncertainty. A belief that nothing will change, is a justification for inaction. In her book Not Too Late, Rebecca Solnit tells us,

Despair is the easy way out. Despair is also, quite simply, bad politics … it encourages what I’ve called the “politics of powerlessness” … Despair is a self-fulfilling prophecy … When we look at the political landscape before us we have every right to assess it as bleak. But nothing about it is inevitable. [11]

David Graeber and David Weingrow, in The Dawn of Everything insist that we are all “projects of collective self-creation” and ask “how is it that we have to be trained in such tight conceptual shackles that we can no longer even imagine the possibility of reinventing ourselves?” [20] Radical hope recognizes the impermanent nature of capitalism as a form of social relationship which is specific to this particular time in history. Considering the historical timeline of our species, capitalism is a momentary abnormality. Though we may be conditioned by capitalist ideologies, radical hope guides us in “thinking and acting beyond and against them,” writes John Holloway. “We think negatively about the society that surrounds us because we are pushing towards a world that does not yet exist but potentially could come into being.” [3]

The current state of things is not permanent, natural, or immutable. We cannot allow our uncertainty to limit our sense of what is possible. We cannot allow despair to make us passive, to undermine our willingness to act. As Nick Estates has said,

Inaction is itself an action. Not doing anything is doing something. At root, we have this responsibility because as long as there are humans on this planet, it matters what their social conditions are. That’s why even a ravaged planet is worth fighting for. [12]

The future of humanity and the biosphere depends on the action (or inaction) of the people who are alive right now . We are presented with essentially two options: Either we make radical systemic changes to how our society is structured, or we continue on the path we are on. The former holds a lot of uncertainty, but “not doing anything” guarantees cataclysmic destruction unmatched in human history. Whether we like it or not, dramatic shifts to the world as we know it are going to happen . There can be no denying that ecological and social fallouts are coming. The stakes make any action we take towards dignity and collective resiliency a worthy cause.

Radical hope is not simply optimism, it is an active and participatory practice. Optimism is a passive expectation that things will simply be okay, and considering the realites of the Collapse, claiming that things will just turn out fine might be called cruel optimism , explained as follows by Johann Hari,

Cruel optimism [is when] you take a really big problem with deep causes in our culture, like obesity or depression or addiction, and you offer people in upbeat language a simplistic, individual solution. It sounds optimistic because you’re telling them the problem can be solved, and soon. But it is in fact cruel because the solution you’re offering is so limited and so blind to the deeper causes that for most people it will fail. [17]

An unthinking “positive attitude” denies reality and relies on discrete behavioral solutions to a global crisis. Radical hope, in contrast, does not turn away from, ignore, or attempt to deny reality, however bleak it may be. Mariame Kaba proclaims that “hope is a discipline.” [16] Hope is a commitment to our values despite the challenges we face. It calls people to unite around shared interests rather than isolating individual solutions.

Avoiding the worst outcomes of the Collapse will be impossible if people don’t have anything to believe in, if people don’t see any point in trying. A hope for a radically different society can provide meaningful direction for our grief and rage, a sense of solidarity with those who we express these emotions with. Hope is a collective process – “the subject of hope is a We.” [18] Without hope, without community, these intense feelings are impotent and debilitating. With hope and collective engagement, they can be a spark for action. Hope cannot be a substitute for action, but action is not possible without hope. George Marshall writes ,

People will willingly shoulder a burden — even one that requires short term sacrifice against uncertain long term threats — provided they share a common purpose and are rewarded with a greater sense of social belonging.

Engaged in hope, we might be able to envision radical change not exclusively as “misery and pointless carnage, but perhaps constructive and useful trauma that could be built on.” [21] The realization we are living in the single most significant moment in human history is charged with meaning. This level of pressure can be incapacitating, but it can also provide an incredible sense of purpose. Radical hope transforms paralysis into possibility, or at least has the potential to.

The Collapse is not a singular event – there is no approaching horizon that delineates then from now – just a decline into increasing social hostility, and ecological instability which is so steady and persistent that it virtually goes unnoticed. Likewise, radical hope is not a means to an ultimate and decisive end, but rather a life enriching dignity in itself. It is the spirit’s refusal to be crushed under the heaviness of the Collapse. We are facing the end of the world as we know it, but this current global hegemonic order should be ended!

Is it possible to experience this moment not exclusively as a disaster but also as an opportunity to radically reorient our social structures away from the profit motive towards meeting basic needs without destroying the natural world? How can we weather the storms that are already bearing down upon us? How can we remain resilient to the stronger storms heading our way? How do we maintain hope when the world is so clearly ending?

Hope is the envisioning of a new reality, creating that reality through everyday actions, both big and small. In order for us to realize this hope, we must internalize that “crisis is a crossroads.” [11] With hope as a foundation, meaningful action can find footing. Hope is not only more politically effective than despair, it is also more individually rewarding because it requires engagement with other people, meaningful collective processes, and loving relationships. Regardless of how the future unfolds, these are what makes life fulfilling and cannot be fully experienced when one is trapped in distraction or isolated in despair. Climate activist Tim DeChristopher has stated,

Our actions to build a more sustainable world and work for justice cannot necessarily be based on an expectation that things will work out. It’s rather an expression of how much we love the people around us, of how much we love the world around us, of how much we love the people that will come after us. [22]

Under our current conditions, to reject despair — to hope — is a radical act. We must soberly confront the Collapse – crucially, in relationship and in community with other people – and consider how we can organize and respond with agency and autonomy towards dignity and collectivity. If we are able to build our capacity to cultivate hope while we grieve, to grow compassion alongside rage, to move through individual despair towards communal connection, we will be more effective in confronting the collapse in a way that both provides meaning and brings us into more resilient communal relationships. If we can believe in our own capacity for compassion, and embody a social ethnic founded on collective wellbeing and solidarity, not only might we stand a chance at building a better future – our lives are better for it now . We are less suspicious, less cruel, less judgmental, less fearful of the existential dread and pervasive uncertainty. This requires we face our pain, allow ourselves to fully experience grief and outrage, using them to fuel our struggles and inform our revolutionary desires, rather than pushing them away or ignoring them – allowing them to weigh us down or burn us out.

If we can process these powerful emotions, collectively and compassionately, they can reinforce our hope rather than debilitate us in despair. Our capacity to feel is itself a radical confrontation with the status quo. This is not passive rhetoric, but a means by which we seek solidarity in the interest of common struggle and collective liberation. The urgency of this moment might provide motivation to stubbornly persist, to endure rather than simply acquiesce – to orient towards love rather than fear.

Radical hope is a dedication to ethical principles and political values despite the uncertainty and fear that accompanies the Collapse. It is more concerned with meaning than prediction. A society that is highly “results oriented” has driven us to Collapse, so we might do well resisting the idea that the only efforts worthwhile are those with quantifiable outcomes. What makes life worth living – connection, beauty, love, friendship, joy – are fundamentally immeasurable. Therefore, we cannot evaluate the success of our movements, actions, or organizing efforts in terms of immediate results. “An insidious capitalist logic holds hostage the far richer and better understanding of value that we use to appreciate our lives in their real fullness,” writes Richard Gilman-Opalsky, “and we must not subject ourselves, our struggles, and our movements to the reductionist thinking of our enemies.” [23]

Byung-Chul Han, in his book The Spirit of Hope articulates hope as a way to open up to a variety of possibilities, stating that the hopeful are “susceptible to the new.” [18] Hope, for Han, is not about perfectly articulated predictions or concepts, but an increase in sensibility of what is possible – a preparation for what-is-not-yet. “The hopeful accept the incalculable possibilities beyond all likelihood.” [18] Our capacity for dynamic responsiveness and compassionate action is increased once we shake off the ideological shackles of capitalist logic. From there, we confront the future as it comes. Radical hope offers a willingness to figure things out collectively as they come, to accept failures along with successes, and to live without guarantees of any kind. Ultimately, hope is not contingent on how things turn out. Returning to Han,

Hope is not prognostication. It is an orientation of the spirit, an orientation of the heart. It transcends the world that is immediately experienced and is anchored somewhere beyond its horizons. [18]

An attachment to any particular political paradigm or preconceived outcome can cause us to lose sight of the value or meaning provided in the act itself, whatever that act may be. “An idea of what should be happening … gets in the way of being present with what is already happening and the capacity to be attuned to the transformative potentials in one’s own situation.” [24] Diversity of thinking and tactic is what makes movements powerful and communities resilient.

No single ideology or political framework can adequately respond to the complexity of our situation. In fact, dogmatism of any kind often renders us less capable to respond to the unfolding and dynamic challenges we may face. Building and sustaining political movements requires an ability to find solidarity with people across lines of ideology, political views, and identity. While analytical frameworks, methods of organizing, and radical traditions throughout history are certainly useful tools, we should use them as such – pick them up when appropriate for the task at hand and lay them aside when they are weighing us down.

An embrace of uncertainty along with a willingness to collaborate in solving problems or resolving conflict is not only more socially fulfilling, but ultimately more politically effective than loyalty to any school of thought. The Zapatistas speak to the murky nature of a radical future, the unwillingness to speak in absolutes, stating:

Zapatismo is not a new political ideology or a rehash of old ideologies. Zapatismo is nothing. It does not exist. It only serves as a bridge to cross from one side to the other. So everyone fits within Zapatista, everyone who want to cross from one side to the other. There are no universal recipes, lines, strategies, tactics, laws, rules, or slogans. There is only a desire to build a better world, that is – a new world. [8]

Radical hope follows this desire, it takes action without attachment to outcome, it flirts with the spiritual, the paradoxical. The pure absurdity of our situation pulls us towards “an awareness of existential ambiguity and irony, to the humor of deep understanding, to the landscape of poets, artists, and tricksters,” as Donald Rothberg puts it. “Mature action is rooted in familiarity with paradox.” [26] This paradox is rich with insight, and further illustrates the ways that joy and grief, hope and despair are not opposite ends of a swinging pendulum, but entangled sentiments which occur in relation to each other.

This is not to dismiss material politics, and to be sure: having goals is important! To be driftless and without any articulated political commitments or tangible goals is also not an effective way to enact meaningful change or combat an oppressive status quo. Non-attachment to outcomes does not mean a lack of dedication nor should it justify non-action. Rather, we act as an extension of our values, as an embodiment of ethical principles which cannot be articulated with rigid dichotomies of success/failure. David R. Loy further illustrates this point in EcoDharma

Acting without attachment to the results of action … is easily understood to imply a casual attitude. Instead, our task is to do the very best we can, not knowing what the consequences will be. In fact, not knowing if our efforts will make any difference whatsoever. We don’t know if what we do is important, but we know that it is important for us to do it. [19]

We cannot know how things will play out. Letting go of prognostication frees us to most effectively address whatever comes our way. It is “as if giving up on saving the world opens us up to doing the things that will save the world.” [25]

The harsh reality is, in many ways we have already been defeated. The fascists are winning, politically and culturally. The Collapse is in full swing. To be brutally honest, most people feel utterly powerless to enact meaningful change on the necessary scale because we are. Humankind may have missed its opportunity to avoid truly catastrophic Collapse. The powers that be have us right where they want us, in most respects, scurrying around for basic survival in a state of psychological dismay and social precarity. So, with that being the case, now what? When individuals, communities, and society at large face the chaos that the Collapse guarantees, we will be forced to ask ourselves: “Who will we become, now?” [30] Knowing we cannot “win”, what will we do? Richard Seymour suggests we

give up without giving up…We despair but we do not submit. Despair without fear, without resignation, without a sense of defeat. [14]

Can we make the revolutionary changes necessary to confront the Collapse before it is too late? Do we have any chance of “saving the world” before human civilization is completely eradicated, taking much of the planet’s nonhuman life with it? How we answer these questions should not affect our willingness to, as best we are able, embody our ethical principles and remain committed to shared values: that nobody is disposable, that the natural world has intrinsic value, and that the current social order is not inevitable.

Radical hope is not attached to outcome but dedicated to ethical principles and committed to social responsibility in the face of impossible challenges. The authors of Joyful Militancy define ethics not as an “individualized set of fixed principles, but instead a capacity to be attuned to the situation, to be immersed in it, and to create something emergent out of existing conditions.” [24]

What is important is not anticipating exactly what is going to happen but retaining our basic humanity regardless of what happens . Let us refuse the inevitability of a social arrangement of domination which robs us of dignity and meaning. Let us accept uncertainty, because “freedom from uncertainty is no freedom.” [35] There are no guarantees, but there are possibilities. We can dedicate ourselves to ethical principles of compassion without losing our teeth. We can direct our vitriol towards the systems of oppression which threaten us all rather than blaming individuals who are fellow victims of these structures and logics.

We haven’t got a chance in hell, but if we remain steadfast in our principles, the sacrifice and dedication required to make radical change is experienced not as a begrudging duty, but an irresistible desire. We engage in radically different ways of living, because we cannot help it . We act in accordance with our beliefs, driven by radical hope, because we feel called to, because we long for something better. If this calling is our foundation for action, rather than a delusional expectation of verifiable success, stultifying adherence to dogma, or an attempt to assuage guilt, those actions are authentic and far more likely to build meaningful connections and resilient communities.

There are worse things than failure. They include capitulating to the grotesque logics of a capitalist society, accepting violent forces of domination and coercion as inevitable, and perpetuating the cruelty and injustice of our world. Despite being one of the most catastrophizing “doomers” in the discourse surrounding the Collapse, Guy McPhereson, captures these ideas well:

…what better judge of our characters than how we act in the face of impossible odds. Comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable on our way down seem like perfectly reasonable strategies to me …. We’re all going to die. But that’s not what this moment is all about. The focus must be on how we live. [27]

In both nihilism and cruel optimism we find convenient excuses not to act, to maintain our personal comfort without challenging our assumptions or thinking critically. “Both of these positions are moral abdication, and together they suggest a false dichotomy.” [28] Whether these principles are “successful” in some abstract evaluation is of less concern than how they orient our lives as we live them.

The uncertainty and impossibility of confronting the Collapse in totality calls for a reorientation of the purpose of our political principles, as well as the meaning we ascribe to the actions we take. Rather than an abstract sense of individual righteousness, what becomes important, as Loy puts it, “is not the unattainable goal, but the direction of one’s efforts, a direction that … orients us without providing any end point .” [19]

The human desire for ontological security is threatened under the psychologically chaotic and materially cruel conditions of the Collapse. By letting go of attachment to results, we unlock unlimited potentials for what the future may look like, while we remain grounded in ethical values of compassion and political principles of liberation. We are given a choice: cling to ideology, live in a state of perpetual existential dread, indulge in the delusion that things will remain this way forever or let go of the reigns and accept that the future is unknowable and unpredictable, harnessing that uncertainty to steer the course of history away from further cruelty and towards dignity. Paraphrasing Matt Christman:

We have to let down our shields, not reinforce them. We cannot control what’s coming, so our instinct is to batten down the hatches — but the shield has already been broken. So the question is: are you going to spend your time between now and whatever you’re afraid of arrayed against yourself and against the people around you, robbing yourself of the ability to have a genuine sense of connection and security? Frantically hurting yourself in the long term by distracting yourself in the short term? If you accept that the shields have already failed, you can avoid fixating on fear of the unknown. [29]

We benefit from “refusing to separate the effectiveness of any tactic or strategy from its affectiveness – how it makes people feel, how it nurtures autonomy or dependence.” [25] Relinquishing attachment to specific outcomes in any given struggle creates a presence and attentiveness to the process of the struggle, shedding light on its most important elements – caring, loving, community-oriented relationships.

The concept of “community” itself can be a sort of illusion, a desperate attempt to articulate a set of social relations which simply cannot exist in the devastating conditions of modern capitalist empire. The economic and technological infrastructure of modernity has robbed us of the skill sets, communal social structures, and intimacy with the land on which we have relied for nearly all of human history, while alienating us from one another. However, caring human relationships based on solidarity and reciprocity are the foundations of a meaningful response to the Collapse. Even if imagined, community is an expression of our “hopes for what the world can be” as the Pinko Collective puts it. They continue,

Though we may be mistaken about the resiliency or depth of our current social relationships, we are speaking a fantasy that expresses our political desire. Community at its best is our aspiration for genuine interdependence, mutual effective care, and a shared collectivity of human flourishing. [2]

Peter Gelderloos, for his part, claims that community is nothing if not a “unit of shared survival.” [6] If that is the case, the Collapse may pull us kicking and screaming into community. Enduring the coming fallout will necessitate a radically different formation of social and communal relationships, and that transformation will be articulated by what we must do to survive. Rather than any particular political vision or ideological framework, it will be the means by which we meet our basic needs that might direct us towards more communal, egalitarian social relationships. When the power goes out, or there is a flood, we are more likely to check in with our neighbors. In the extreme, that propensity might give us a glance at what the future may hold. Our interdependence and our collective nature might be revealed through the terrain of crisis.

This will be far from romantic – harsher material conditions will be experienced unequally according to social and economic status. However, for a majority of people, the Collapse may create conditions which bring us – by necessity – into more embodied, less alienating social arrangements. The versions of ourselves which the moment calls for are forged in the (literal?) fires of the Collapse. Radical hope pulls us towards tendency in our lives, as we live them.

We know that we cannot depend on hierarchal, class based power structures to help us in the Collapse. Consciously or not, worsening conditions may force people into interdependent localized networks of mutual aid, communal problem solving, and reciprocal relationships. We may find in this great unraveling the kinds of acts of solidarity which are inherent in human communities under crisis or tragedy. “Our human tendency to pull together in emergency situations, even to risk our lives helping others, is well documented.” [39] Human nature is one of cooperation, and disaster often brings this out in us.

When the power goes off or the tap stops flowing, no amount weaponry, prepper gear, or stockpiled toilet paper will matter if we are not engaged in a reliable community of people we can trust. As the effects of the Collapse worsen, it is a community of people we are in physical contact with – whose wellbeing we are invested in, and who are invested in our wellbeing – which will be the most important resource of all. Establishing these relationships requires we dismantle the capitalist mythology of human nature as inherently cruel and selfish, and recognize that it is capitalist exchange relations themselves which have all but erased the interdependent community relationships in which humans have organized themselves (generally speaking) for the majority of our history.

Through embodied, face to face relationships of mutual reciprocity and material interdependence we might build exemplary frameworks for the resistance of capitalist logic. This is a vision of the future that we must create the foundations for, here and now. This process prioritizes the nurturing of relationships over rhetorical political theories. It means that even in the face of certain doom, we show up for each other in interpersonal relationships and show compassion for ourselves and others as best we can. Peter Gelderloos writes,

If we fight in a way that is consistent with the world that we want to defend, then every step we take — even if we don’t make it all the way — leaves the world a better place and could make the difference between life and death for a person, a community, an ecosystem that right now is under threat. Recognizing that we live only thanks to a beautiful web of relationships with countless other beings, nurturing those relationships is the best possible way to live. [4]

Easier said than done – relationships are hard! The challenge of collectivity is exasperated by our highly alienating social environment. The kinds of relationships we need to cultivate must be resilient enough to endure interpersonal conflict and material adversity, the messiness and chaos of being a person in relation to other people. Gelderloos continues to articulate this idea beautifully, so I’ll just continue to quote him at length:

At a certain moment, we need to risk ourselves. We need to drop our guard. The Revolution is not the geometric expansion of our bubbles of autonomy, of our safe spaces. It is not a trajectory with an endpoint, in which we have all become perfect hosts for our principles and theories. It is a complete change in everything. We ourselves will not exist, not as we currently know ourselves. It is an insanely optimistic expansion of trust and solidarity to include nearly everyone else on the planet. That is why the idea of community is so important. It is not a group of friends and not an enclave of perfect souls. It is simply a body of people of all sorts, all rough around the edges and imperfections, who share their survival … The supreme act of optimism, then, is not the belief that everyone will somehow become better, but that we will dare to lower our shields and approach life in a way that constantly beckons towards a shared community of needs and desires.[57]

We need to build and sustain communities that are not merely abstract ideas, but tangible networks of support, interdependence and mutuality — embodiments of a “principle of cooperation and the responsibility to each other and the earth,” [33] as Silvia Federici puts it.

Projects and organizations of all shades provide an opportunity for people to “participate more fully in the web of relations and affections in which we are enmeshed.” [24] For me, music is a tool for this sort of embodied engagement. For others it may be a community garden, a political organization, or a religious gathering. These encounters cultivate a sense of collective responsibility which is socially fulfilling. Other people become active participants in our shared lives whose wellbeing we have personal investment in. By cultivating trusting relationships and reinforcing structures of sharing resources, trading skills, and establishing rituals of meaning, our deep social and emotional needs for community belonging and a sense of purpose are met through the collective process. As Miriam Kaba offers, “Everything worthwhile is done with other people.” [16]

Pacifying delusion, ideological confusion, and false solutions abound in the discourse concerning what is to come and what is to be done. While these narratives vary widely — from the whacky and conspiratorial to the grim and nihilistic — it appears to me that there are three broadly popular stories regarding what the future will look like, and what we should do. Each story corresponds to a general political affiliation, harboring their own discrete fantasy about the Collapse.

The centrist liberal fantasy is that we shall be saved through technological advancement — most recently expressed in the “abundance” agenda or what some refer to as “techno-optimism” — without ever confronting the underlying social conditions under which technology is produced, and to what ends. Regardless of its miraculous capability, technology cannot be removed from its social context. “The world teems with great innovations that deserve application as ways of checking the ecological crisis,” writes Kovel, “but will not be used because they run against the exigencies of accumulation.” [7] Because we face fundamentally social problems, solutions to those problems must adequately address the underlying ideologies of our society. The idea that technological progress in and of itself will mitigate the worst possibilities of the Collapse is a liberal delusion which fails to call into question any underlying assumptions of our social order or dismantling reigning power structures.
