---
title: "Anarchism"
author: "Ian Adams"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ian-adams-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Excerpted from second edition of “Political Ideology Today”"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ian-adams-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ian-adams-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Individualist anarchism          William Godwin          Max Stirner          Nineteenth-century American anarchism          Personal anarchism        Socialist anarchism          Proudhon          Bakunin          Tolstoy          Kropotkin          Anarchist terrorism          Anarcho-syndicalism        Anarchism and Marxism          Differences and similarities          Anarchism and the New Left        Recent developments in anarchist theory          Deschooling society          Feminist and green anarchism          Anarcho-capitalism          Anarchism and postmodernity        Fundamentals and criticism          Anarchism and human nature          Rules and authority          Problems with socialist anarchism          Problems with anarcho-capitalism The word ‘anarchy’ comes from the ancient Greek and means ‘without rule’, and in ordinary parlance ‘anarchy’ means the same as ‘chaos’. But there is a long-established body of political theory calling itself ‘anarchism’ that is based upon the idea that the state, or any other kind of political rule, is not only unnecessary but a positive evil that must be done away with. Such ideas have only occasionally inspired political movements of any size, and the tradition is mainly one of individual thinkers, but they have produced an important body of theory. The first significant anarchist thinker was William Godwin, who developed his ideas around the time of the French Revolution. However, the idea that it is possible to do without the state was not invented by the anarchists, but has a much older history in Christian theology. There is a long tradition in European thought, going back to the great theologian and exponent of the theory of Original Sin, St. Augustine of Hippo (354–430 AD), which argues that government is needed because human nature is corrupt, and that if it were not corrupt then government would not be necessary. On this view, government is essentially coercive, being there to keep the sinners in line by laying down laws and punishing those who break them. It was an idea still strong in the eighteenth century. Thus, James Madison (1751–1836), the chief architect of the American constitution, wrote: there is a degree of depravity in mankind that requires a certain degree of circumspection and distrust... But what is government itself, but the greatest of all reflections on human nature? If men were angels, no government would be necessary. ( The Federalist Papers , Nos. 51 & 55, in Hamilton et al., 1961) Neither Augustine nor Madison were anarchists, but what this line of thought did open up was the possibility that government could be done away with if the evil in the world could be eliminated. What the anarchists did was to say that the evil in the world was not caused by Original Sin, but was in fact mainly the consequence of government. As the poet Shelley (William Godwin’s son-in-law) put it: If government was taken away human beings would be good and all coercion and domination would be unnecessary. The first anarchist thinkers, in both Europe and America, saw themselves as, for the most part, continuing the Enlightenment tradition, emphasising the sovereignty of the individual and the progress of reason. It was William Godwin (1756–1836), in his Enquiry Concerning Political Justice of 1793, who first argued the anarchist case: that the state had a corrupting influence on those subject to it, and that a much better society could therefore be built without it. Godwin had an optimistic, Enlightenment view of human nature. Our individual natures, he thought, were the product of our environment and upbringing, although that could be improved upon by the application of reason. With the spread of science and philosophy and improved education, there was no doubt in his mind that mankind would gradually improve. The ills of war, poverty, crime and violence would disappear, since he took it for granted that the consequence of people becoming more rational is that…
