---
title: "For Community"
author: "Larry Gambone"
date: "2011"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/larry-gambone-for-community-the-communitarian-anarchism-of-gustav-landauer"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Communitarian Anarchism Of Gustav Landauer"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "larry-gambone-for-community-the-communitarian-anarchism-of-gustav-landauer.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/larry-gambone-for-community-the-communitarian-anarchism-of-gustav-landauer.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Biography        Landauer as Anarchist        The State        Violence and Social Change        The Alternative to Capitalism        Society and Folk Consciousness        Philosophy        Marxism        Landauer Today        Appendix          Landauer And The Socialist International          Landauer And Christ          Hakim Bey on the Munich Soviet        Bibliography Gustav Landauer was born in Karlsruhe, Germany on April 7 1870 of bourgeois origin. At a very early age he came into conflict with both his teachers and parents, but in spite of this, excelled academically. Nevertheless, he dropped out of college after studying literature, philosophy and medicine. Landauer moved to Berlin, and for a short time was under the tutelage of Johann Most. (Later, in the opposite direction, the Tolstoyan anarchist, Benedikt Friedlander became a major influence.) From 1893 to 1899, Landauer edited The Socialist , which, in spite of its name, was an anarchist journal. Prison was to be his home in 1893, 1896, and 1899, each time for civil disobedience. When he attended the 1893 Congress of the Social Democratic International, August Bebel denounced him as a police agent. An attempt to enter the 1896 International Congress in London met with only limited success. (See Appendix for more information on the Congress) At this time he was under Kropotkin’s influence but by 1900 he had shifted toward a position much closer to Proudhon and Tolstoy, advocating passive resistance in the place of violence and looking toward the spread of cooperative enterprises as the really constructive way to social change . [1] In 1900 Landauer also joined the literary group, Neue Gemeinschaft , where he became friends with Martin Buber and the anarchist Erich Muhsam. Two years later he married and moved to England for a year, living next door to Peter Kropotkin. He was also friends with Max Nettlau and the novelist Constantin Brunner. About the same time, he edited Meister Eckhart’s works, who along with Spinoza, had a great influence upon his thinking. Landauer became increasingly disillusioned with the left’s sterility and dogmatism and began to move more toward communitarianism. The Socialist Federation was launched in 1908 to promote the development of communities and a year later The Socialist began publication again. In 1911 Landauer wrote his best known work, For Socialism . The Socialist Federation spread through Germany and Switzerland, with some twenty local organizations with meetings of up to 800 people. Landauer’s anarchist opponents accused him of weakening the movement by siphoning militants away from the class struggle. But the attempt to create communities, free schools and cooperatives was cut short by the war. The Socialist ceased publication early in 1915, for obvious reasons. Although active in opposition to the war, Landauer concentrated upon literature, writing plays and studies of Shakespeare, Hölderlin, Goethe and Strindberg. (He was fortunate to live long before PC and its “Dead European White Males” viciousness.) When the German Revolution broke out in late 1918, he was in Bavaria with his friend Kurt Eisner, who was leading the revolutionary movement. But Landauer became critical of his Eisner, wanting an out and out workers council republic and not just a left-wing version of social democracy. Only the workers councils seemed to offer hope for breaking with capitalism and the state. Landauer joined the Bavarian Workers Council and had much support among the workers, leading a demonstration of 80,000 for a workers council republic. When the councils took over Munich, Landauer was put in charge of information. The Workers’ Republic was of brief duration however, as a right-wing offensive allowed the Communists to take over. He was dismissed from his post. The Communist Republic was soon crushed by the proto-Nazi Freikorps. Landauer was arrested and placed in Stadelheim Prison. According to his friend Ernst Toller, “They dragge…
