---
title: "A fight for Useful Work"
author: "Kevin Doyle"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-a-fight-for-useful-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Lucas Aerospace"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-doyle-a-fight-for-useful-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-a-fight-for-useful-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       MILITARY MATTERS        POOR WAGES        STRUGGLE PAYS        USEFUL JOBS        SHUNNED BY BOSSES        ...AND UNION LEADERS        SELL OUT        DIRECT ACTION        PROFITS FIRST        LABOUR PARTY        JOB CUTS JOBS ARE UNDER threat all over the place. It is not just ones that are useful to us; like nursing, teaching, bus drivers; that are chopped. There are also workers in plants producing weapons, nuclear power, and so on whose futures are far from secure. Workers like those making missiles in Shorts in Belfast whose jobs could well vanish if privatisation plans are put into operation. While we don’t want to see anyone tossed onto the dole we also need to question what is being produced and in whose interests, As well as fighting to save the jobs we should be bringing up this issue In the 1970s workers at the Lucas Aerospace Company in Britain set out to defeat the bosses plans to axe jobs. They Produced their own alternative “Corporate Plan” for the company’s future. In doing so they attacked some of the underlying priorities of capitalism, Their proposals were radical, arguing for an end to the wasteful production of military goods and for peoples’ needs to be put before the owner’s profits. Lucas Aerospace in the early 70’s was one of Europe’s largest designers and manufacturers of aircraft systems and equipment. It had over 18,000 workers on its Payroll’ spread over 15 factories, throughout Britain. Nearly half of its business was related to military matters&emdash;in product” ion of combat aircraft and the Sting Ray missile system for NATO. But it also had small interests in medical technologies. The Company had been formed into the size it was through the take-overs and amalgamations of smaller size companies. It had been backed by the Government of the day who wanted a strong and efficient aerospace company to compete with the other European manufacturers. As part of achieving this Management planned to rationalise the whole 15 factory operation into a more integrated and streamlined company. This would mean lay-offs for at least 20% of the workforce and the closure of some areas. The prize for the owners of Lucas in doing this, would be a much greater involvement in the military markets where profit rates were very high compared with other industries. The intentions of the Company’ owners and management did not go unnoticed by the Lucas workers or their Shop Stewards Combine Committee (SSCC). The origins of the SSCC was in the strong trade union tradition at the time in Britain though particularly in the aerospace industry. Over a period of years the workers in the different unions had seen the need to co-ordinate their negotiations against a single management so as to avoid poor wage increases as one section was paid off at the expense of the others. So they formed shop stewards committees that bridged their different union memberships. As the company had grown bigger these shop steward committees from different areas also linked up, to carry on the same idea of meeting the management with a single voice for all workers in any negotiations. The SSCC at Lucas which linked all the company sites had not, however, come about without much effort or struggle. It had grown to the importance it had because of its involvement with the direct rank and file struggles of workers there and was looked to by many far more than their individual unions or full time union officials. One of the most spectacular successes of the SSCC was in the Burnley strike in 1972 when by means of mobilising the support of all Lucas workers, a 13 week strike by Burnley workers was carried to a successful conclusion leading to a wage increase 167% larger than that nationally negotiated by the Union officials! The SSCC in the course of the strike had organised widespread collections and support meetings for the striking workers and had backed this up with strategic work stoppages at different plants that had maximised the losses to t…
