---
title: "Anti-State Responses to Terrorism"
author: "William Gillis"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-gillis-anti-state-responses-to-terrorism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://c4ss.org/content/52319"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-gillis-anti-state-responses-to-terrorism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-gillis-anti-state-responses-to-terrorism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Another week, another misogynist and/or white nationalist terrorist attack. They’re urging each other on, they’re forming broad movements, ecosystems, networks of cells. The Base. Atomwaffen. The Rise Above Movement. American Identity Movement. Hammerskin Nation. Wolves of Vinland. European Kindred. Proud Boys. The names and factions proliferate. Hordes congregate online to cheer the latest atrocity and urge further. One is left unsure if the shootings will speed up in their regularity or if they are moving towards some dramatic escalation. Perhaps they will shoot up a nursery. Spread gas in a major city. Finally make good on their “Right Wing Death Squad” promises and try to march door-to-door exterminating enemies. There is a sense that almost the entire political spectrum — minus antifa — has decided to sit back and wait for the spectacle. I’ve been thinking a lot about why the coalition that opposed the Bush Administration fractured so badly in the face of resurgent fascists. There’s a lot of reasons — the whole paleocon saga for instance. But I think it’s under-examined how much of it comes down to two very different perspectives on insurgency. Way back in the immediate aftermath of September 11th — as leftists, liberals, and libertarians came to terms with the radical expansion of state power and huddled together for warmth — it was common to hear two very different critiques of the War On Terror: The first critique was that islamist insurgency isn’t a real threat. The second critique was that such insurgency was so potent against states that the US couldn’t win against it. It was somehow never apparent at the time how contradictory these two positions are. In the first perspective Al-Qaeda was a criminal organization that could and should be arrested and prosecuted in the context of existing criminal enforcement. In the latter perspective Al-Qaeda was the Viet Cong, destined to win against the empire, and the sooner the US retreated the less costly the whole thing would be. Broadly speaking, liberals took the first perspective, anarchists the latter. Libertarians and leftists split between the two camps. This was a split over the recognition of asymmetric conflict. Liberals thought the state could handle anything, whereas anarchists have faith that decentralized insurgent modes of resistance are highly effective. This is an underemphasized reason why anarchists take fascist organizing so seriously — we believe in the power of radical activism and insurgency (although we reject specific forms of terrorism). If you believe that these decentralized or bottom-up means of organizing can accomplish anything and even out-punch the US empire, then fascists utilizing the same strategies logically constitute a bigger threat than the US empire. From this perspective, as bad as the War On Terror was, as bad as the neoconservative or neoliberal authoritarians were, insurgent fascists are worse. But to those liberals who don’t believe in asymmetric conflict and insurgent resistance, who spent decades arguing that terrorism wasn’t a real threat — the logic is reversed. Misogynist and white nationalist terrorists must be framed as marginal distractions. Deplorable, but not existential dangers. Indeed this liberal perspective continues to fear state repression more than it does paramilitary terrorism, instinctively drawing a deep difference between the two. Thus anarchist resistance to neonazi activity is first and foremost framed in terms of liberal fears about “giving the state a license to oppress.” Whereas to anarchists the US empire — while still evil — is almost a peripheral concern in comparison to the potential danger of reactionary insurgents. Hence anarchists going to Syria to fight ISIL and anarchists fighting fascist street gangs. These conflicts are much more insurgent versus insurgent than they are the institution versus insurgent of the US War On Terror. Anarchists by virtue of our politics have to believe deeply in the p…
