---
title: "Finding Our Own Fire"
author: "The Fayer Collective"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-fayer-collective-finding-our-own-fire"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published in “There Is Nothing So Whole as a Broken Heart: Mending the World as Jewish Anarchists”. Edited by Cindy Milstein. Published by AK Press. Fayer is a collective of artists, revolutionaries, workers, students, criminals, and free lovers—fighting for the earth, the good life, and "
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-fayer-collective-finding-our-own-fire.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-fayer-collective-finding-our-own-fire.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The US South is a region of the world that can’t be understood from any less than a hundred perspectives. It’s home to over half the United States’ Black population and yet is viewed, seemingly across the board, as the most racist part of said country. It’s been ignored by the political establishment and wealthy for decades, then labeled as backward and unintelligent by the same ones that landed us where we are. This has put us, as anarchists, and more so Jewish anarchists, in an unfortunately unique position. We’ve had to fight tooth and nail against classist forces that wish us gone in the name of development and safety, and at the same time, fight those of our class who dawn white hoods and wish us dead because we don’t eat pork. At the front line of both these enemies are blue and red flashing lights, excitedly ready to beat and arrest us at a moment’s notice. This is still a simplified summary, of course. To assume that the whole southern fascist movement is working class is itself classist—something that coastal liberalism has yet to (or chooses not to) understand. Many of those we face on the streets are the same ones who’re raising our rents, flipping our neighborhoods, and cutting our pay. Nevertheless, for the past decade, this is the situation that we and our friends have found ourselves in. Indeed, Klan and Nazi activity are never infrequent in our lives. For instance, a rich Klan lawyer is actively buying up property in the Atlanta, Georgia, neighborhood where some of us live. And as Jews in the South, this has never been hidden from us, whether it took the form of some of us being attacked at our homes to witnessing parents pull their kids from school when they found out that they’d learned about Chanukah that day. As anarchists, we’ve been organizing, building our world, and fostering a revolutionary culture for close to ten years now—some of us for longer than that, and some of us for only a matter of months. But for most of this time, those of us who would become the Fayer Collective never thought to or saw the benefit of organizing explicitly as Jewish anarchists. While for some of us, our Jewishness may have been prominent in our personal lives, it was only a background fact in nearly all our political lives. That was soon to change. In 2017, the National Socialist Movement, a neo-Nazi political organization, had announced that it would hold a rally in Newnan, Georgia, on April 21 of the following year. Around November, in our own various crews and groups, we began organizing with the coalition that was forming under the banner #NoNaziNewnan. One of the coalition’s goals was to get marginalized religious communities, such as synagogues and mosques, to support the counterorganizing effort, so we did outreach, but not one synagogue decided to join us. At first this seemed surprising. There were two main reasons, though, that the synagogues did not want to sign on. One was understandable: the fear of being targeted by these neo-Nazis in the future. The other was frustrating: they didn’t want to be associated with what they called “the Antifa” (Atlanta Antifa was part of the coalition and the most publicly associated group with the counterdemonstration). Despite this setback and with less support than hoped, the coalition forged ahead, but what we experienced in Newnan would only encourage our already-growing resentments toward what felt like another betrayal by the institutional and liberal wing of Jews in the United States. As we arrived in downtown Newnan, we saw the full force of what we were up against. Tanks filled the streets, snipers were positioned on the rooftops, and soldiers occupied all the “public” space. The small, rural, Georgian town was militarized, ready to defend neo-Nazis against any and all threats to their “freedom of speech.” The arrests began only minutes after we gathered on a corner, before the march had even started. This was simply a prelude of things to come in Newnan that day. The …
