---
title: "The Gates of Orthodox Ijtihad"
author: "Sidewinder"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sidewinder-the-gates-of-orthodox-ijtihad"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved 12/01/2021 from https://web.archive.org/web/20120309050349/http://anarchism.pageabode.com/sidewinder/the-gates-of-orthodox-ijtihad"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sidewinder-the-gates-of-orthodox-ijtihad.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sidewinder-the-gates-of-orthodox-ijtihad.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Unproductive Labour        Fictitious Capital        No value created in the sphere of circulation        Base/Superstructure        Good Investor / Bad Speculator dichotomy Like Judaism, Islam is not only a community of faith but a system of law and jurisprudence. Islamic jurisprudence is based upon the interpretation of the texts of the Qur’an, the Hadith and Sunnah. Various schools or madhabs of past interpretations have built up over time such that coming to a ruling can come through two main routes — the imitation ( taqlid ) of past scholars and the traditional schools, or original interpretation of the source texts. This is ijtihad , a word derived from the same 3-letter root (j-h-d, jahada — “struggle”) as jihad , meaning “struggle with yourself”. It contains the idea that original interpretation is a product of struggle, arduous and potentially a mortal danger to body and soul. Whilst in the Shia tradition of ijtihad continues to be a central part of jurisprudence, it is much less in evidence in contemporary Sunni tradition where following the madhabs is the conventional route. The dominant story until recently was that this was because at some time between the 10 th to 12 th centuries (CE) the dominant Sunni view came to be that contemporary scholars were too remote from the “rightly guided” followers of Mohammed to any longer be capable of righteous new interpretations. This story was called the closing of the gates of ijtihad, and is associated with the ascendance of the “anti-philosophy” Asharite school, principally lead by Al-Ghazali, over the more Aristotlean and Neo-Platonic inspired Mutazilites. Now it must be said that this account was principally one devised by Western Orientalists, often associated with a search for idealist or culturalist explanations for the perceived decline of Muslim civilisation (specifically the Ottoman empire) relative to the West. Unsurprisingly there are now challenges by muslim historians sceptical of these Orientalist meta-narratives, pointing out that the death of ijtihad in the Sunni tradition has been exaggerated and the “closing of the gates” is a nice story but not really adequate to the complexities of the actual history in which material economic, military, political and inter-imperialist conflicts have a much larger part. If the story of the closing of the gates of ijtihad is today suspect as an account of the development of Sunni orthodoxy, it does have an irresistible draw as a metaphor for the contemporary stagnation of Marxist orthodoxy. While the gates of orthodox Marxist ijtihad are not officially closed, many people who have tried to progress the struggle for new interpretations of the 21 st century capitalist world system find their way blocked by a number of gates sealed with orthodox shibboleths by those who believe Lenin’s “Imperialism, The Highest Stage of Capitalism” to be the final word on “the Epoch” (see previous post “Orthodoxy and Time”). Collectively these seals represent a comprehensive block on the directions new interpretations must travel to understand the workings of the financialised system of “Capitalism with Derivatives” that Neoliberalism has (partly inadvertantly) built and has so recently plunged us into the first major global economic crisis of the 21 st century. These seals must be broken. Here we look at 5 sealed gates. Unproductive Labour Fictitious Capital No value created in the sphere of circulation Base / Superstructure Good Investor / Bad Speculator dichotomy This is a perennial favourite, so many forests have been cut down to print the volume of diatribes between Marxists about the true distinction between what types of labour are productive of value and what are not, to the complete ignorance and indifference of the outside world, that it is tempting to say that this debate is itself the primary examplar of unproductive labour. Candidates for “unproductive labour” range from the usual “luxury” personal services providers from…
