---
title: "The Battle Against Bayer: The End...or is it?"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-battle-against-bayer-the-end-or-is-it"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "from Green Anarchist #71–72, Spring 2004 Retrieved on January 1, 2005 from www.greenanarchist.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-the-battle-against-bayer-the-end-or-is-it.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-battle-against-bayer-the-end-or-is-it.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Bayer Actions The facts of the anti-GM movement in the UK would seem to be this: Inspired by anti-GM actions, the first of which took place in California in 1987, followed by others all across the world, people in the UK began to take action against GM crop trials 6 years ago. This mostly consisted of very simple night-time activity: groups of people pulling up the crops. There were also some open and accountable actions, some succesful and some failed daylight raids, some other sabotage of GM facilities and companies plus a lot of pressure from lobby groups. In summer 2003 at an EF! gathering, with commercialisation looming and the last of the crop trials fled from Britain, the largest genetic company in Europe, Bayer AG, won itself the attention of a national campaign. 6 months later the government gave a half-arsed handshake to the biotech industry by saying yes to GM maize and no to rape and sugar beet. Bayer, battered and bruised by the combined efforts of the antiGM actions and lobbying said thanks but no thanks. And the happy ending is that no GM crops are to be grown in Britain in the foreseeable future... not for the next 4 years at any rate. This is undeniably excellent news, and whilst Bayer’s parting comment was one of commercial unviability, all those with sore knees from pulling crops, or quick metal still stuck under the finger nails, we knew different. But what went on behind the scenes, and is it really over? The campaign against Bayer saw over 50 actions in a few months. Offices were occupied, spraypainted, blockaded, glued up and smashed, directors were harassed at home, scientists were pied, events attended by their speakers were ruined, and in the last month the Boycott Bayer campaign was launched with stickers, leaflets, posters and a website. As with all struggles though, the tensions were not only between biotechnology and its enemies. Within the anti-GM ranks there was also painful conflict. Some of these tensions were to be expected as people were in the battle for different reasons — from consumer pressure groups to green anarchists, and obviously, the motives and moves of each were ragingly different. The anti-Bayer campaign was sprung from the ecological direct action movement but this didn’t mean a smoother ride. People fell out massively over tactics: in particular the issue of home visits, and the promises of regular actions fell to the wayside with a shockingly tepid commitment to activism. (The vast majority who swore they would do regular actions just didn’t.) There was an injunction against several individuals and several groups which seemed to floor the campaign’s ability to do anything which wasn’t strictly legal in the first place. There were, of course, some tasty bonuses; such as the sacking of Paul Rylott as head of Bioscience, and when Michael O’Brien (company director) resigned, the injuncted groups got a letter from his solicitors telling us, effectively, to now leave him alone please. But by the time Bayer announced it was packing up and going home it felt as much like relief as victory. The direct action campaign against Bayer was succesful because there was such a hefty anti-GM lobby and because of the dislike of the British public against anything new. A hatred of immigrants and a hatred of GM seem to stem from the same vile conservatism and commitment to western civilisation AS IT IS... making uneasy bedfellows with the ecodirect action movement. The ecological direct action movement so happened to be on the same side for once. The disappointing truth is the ecological direct action movement is not strong enough or commited enough to have beaten Bayer out of this tiny island otherwise. The campaign was marred by broken words and general softness and we are lucky that the feisty few who stuck their necks out didn’t in more trouble. But hey, we didn’t co-opt our politics and we didn’t go to prison and it was certainly the best thing going on over the last year... and we st…
