---
title: "Advertising Anarchy"
author: "Ponkan"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bandilang-itim-advertising-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An introduction to advertising and propaganda for anarchists"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "bandilang-itim-advertising-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bandilang-itim-advertising-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Why Advertising? (or Propaganda, whatever)          Combating narratives          Offering alternatives, information/education        For a new strategy of Anarchist propaganda          Purposes and the Target Audience          Medium is the Message          Unequivocality and consistency          Legibility, Simplicity          Avenues of expression          Challenges        ADDENDUM: A case study of CrimethInc. Throughout history Anarchism and Anarchies have long been known to appear and explode as vibrant as it is sporadic. At its most practical, it has been long defined by bursts of activity and small, however self-professing or simply resemblant it is. Most of this intermittent yet persistent attitude is brought by the movement’s preference for solutions-based activity over theory. If there is any, its most seminal ones do not play around its own philosophy–it is unfettered and blunt aside from some bents towards propagandistic and erudite language. Why wait, nay–prepare for the coming upheaval when you can make liberation happen yourself? Direct action! Today, the bulk of this action rests much on mutual aid activity (which is, of course, much needed especially now, support them at all costs!). However, the more ambitious or holistic ones, were the ones who are actively establishing anarchies– that is, spaces in which liberty can be experienced and upheld. When we speak of such an anarchy, “spaces” do not simply talk of territories or systems, but rather, of social relations , of situations . It doesn’t have a set criteria other than the intent of eschewing practices and institutions that uphold privilege and oppression. At its largest, perhaps it’s a network of solidarity. These anarchies persist in places outside the purview of the state’s legibility. “Cracks in the pavement” so to speak. When we talk of building these anarchies, we talk about people. Its growth could lever these cracks wider, if ever–“by doing so we are unlikely to destroy the concrete utterly but we can open up more spaces in which to grow together.” ( Desert , Anonymous) For people who are interested or are actively working towards it, communication becomes a key factor into it. For anarchists within my personal circle, most of them treat it as a very personal affair, between them and others. “All politics is personal.” Reaching out to people, particularly people or groups whom you want to help to self-organize (or at least, goad them to doing it), requires that sort of communication. Becoming effective in it tends to require well, communication skills. It’s not a requirement to be a “good anarchist” (because a, there’s none in the first place, and b, why), but it would certainly get you far. It gets people going. It inspires people. With that in mind, why not we make communications itself a clear branch of praxis? Perhaps it’s a misnomer–and perhaps, a poor choice of words–to be referring to the tactics of communications and propaganda as “advertising,” especially, for most anarchists, for its associations with Capitalism. Hell, even market anarchists would seethe at the very industry that perpetuates the purgatory of consumerism. These days term “propaganda” might as well serve the same purpose, though for the purposes of our thing, let’s stick with “advertising.” Bear with me. Advertising as a practice sets itself apart for targeting their audiences and their mediums. Turn on the TV. Open a periodical. Turn off your adblock. Look outside and see the vast diversity of saccharine ads and billboards and posters and commercials you see outside. You’ll notice that some would appeal to your personal tastes or inconveniences, and some wont relate at all. (“Are you TIRED of washing the dishes? Try Kitchen Gun!” ) You’ll perhaps see the differences between the poster, newspaper ad, commercial or the billboard saying and selling the same thing. For example: Billboards have sparser text and more striking imagery. And when it gets smaller and smaller…
