---
title: "Challenges of Police Investigations Into Anarchist Direct Actions"
author: "No Trace Project"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/no-trace-project-challenges-of-police-investigations-into-anarchist-direct-actions"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 23/08/2025 from https://notrace.how/blog/challenges/challenges.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "no-trace-project-challenges-of-police-investigations-into-anarchist-direct-actions.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/no-trace-project-challenges-of-police-investigations-into-anarchist-direct-actions.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Baseline surveillance        Investigating anarchist groups        After the action        Balancing repression and the respect for “human rights”        Final remarks Let’s say a few anarchists are planning an illegal, anonymous direct action. For example, they want to paint a wall, or smash a bank, or burn down a government building. The goals of the police are to prevent actions like this from taking place and/or identify and arrest the anarchists and gather enough evidence for them to be convicted. What can the police do to achieve these goals, depending on their motivation, their resources, the type of action, and the way the anarchists organize? What challenges will they face? And how can anarchists identify these challenges as weaknesses in order to exploit them and act without getting caught ? This text aims to contribute to answering these questions by addressing some points that we think have been insufficiently explored in anarchist literature in recent years. “ The register constitutes our memory. Let it know what you have collected. Notes kept in the desk drawer may possibly have enriched your own knowledge, but not the knowledge of the division . Make sure therefore that information is registered! It is only then that you improve the division’s ability to answer the continuously recurring questions: Who is this and what is known about them?” — Extract from a 1953 directive of the Säkerhetspolisen (Security Service), Sweden’s main domestic intelligence agency. Even before the anarchists start planning the action, they may already be under surveillance, especially if they express their anarchist ideas in public settings or if they are suspected of having carried out actions in the past. Maybe their names are on a list of people “considered a threat to national security,” their social media accounts are monitored, their DNA is in a database, or informants or infiltrators attend their meetings. This baseline surveillance is often carried out by intelligence agencies tasked with collecting and analyzing information to support the work of the police. The police have a long memory, and the information they collect can be kept for decades. A major challenge that intelligence agencies face is intelligence fragmentation, which is when different agencies, or different divisions within the same agency, have different information about an issue and do not sufficiently share information with each other, resulting in suboptimal analysis of the issue. The primary cause of this fragmentation is secrecy: the need for agencies to keep their work secret from the targets of surveillance and from the public. To minimize the risk of leaks, information sharing is deliberately restricted, including through security clearances, compartmentalized divisions, and analysts working on a need-to-know basis. For example, a local police department may not know that an informant could provide information on a local anarchist group because the national agency employing the informant does not trust the local department with this information. A secondary cause of intelligence fragmentation is interagency competition. Agencies may be reluctant to share information with each other because of differing strategic or political objectives. For example, in the United States the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) prioritizes long-term intelligence gathering, while the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) prioritizes short-term investigations leading to prosecutions. An agency may also be reluctant to share information with another out of self-preservation: perhaps budget cuts are coming, and sharing information would undermine the agency’s ability to prove its worth to political leaders and avoid layoffs. Another challenge that intelligence agencies face is analyzing large amounts of collected information. Machines are now very good at performing a narrow set of tasks, such as matching a DNA profile against millions of other profiles, or finding a key…
