---
title: "On the murder of Abdifatah Ahmed by Victoria Police"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-on-the-murder-of-abdifatah-ahmed-by-victoria-police"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://antieverything.noblogs.org/post/2025/04/30/on-the-murder-of-abdifatah-ahmed-by-victoria-police/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-on-the-murder-of-abdifatah-ahmed-by-victoria-police.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-on-the-murder-of-abdifatah-ahmed-by-victoria-police.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       ‘What does materially acting in solidarity for Black life look like?’        Kkkops and Kkkompradors Two accounts of a solidarity rally for Abdifatah Ahmed and its aftermath. The GoFundMe for Abdifatah’s family is here: https://www.gofundme.com/f/justice-for-abdifatah-ahmed-support-his-familys-fight There was a moment of rupture that was defused at the Justice for Abdifatah Ahmed afternoon rally on Tuesday 22 nd of April. This is an attempt to provide an account against the lies circulated by corporate media and people propagating counter-insurgent narratives. To be clear, this is written by non-Black settlers, but because these falsities are spreading in our networks, we want to clear them up. The rally started as a stock-standard community rally affair, initiated by Somali community networks. The anger was subdued but palpable: the cops had murdered 35-year-old Somali man Abdifatah Ahmed the Thursday before near Coles in Footscray. The killer cops according to witnesses acted ‘senselessly’, and immediately saw him as a ‘threat’ to them for having a knife. There was a whole gamut of milquetoast liberal politics at the rally. One speaker even led ‘aussie aussie aussie oi oi oi’; the Mayor spoke (thankfully dressed down for hypocrisy); and there was numerous injunctions to be ‘peaceful’ and report anyone ‘doing anything’ to the marshals in hi vis. That said many speakers got to the unjust core: this was an anti-Black, Afrophobic political murder by the cops in a lineage of racist, anti-poor policing. He was abandoned by the system, living on the streets, and there was no mental health support. After speeches, hundreds of us eventually marched to the Footscray cop shop. The turn-out was multiracial but mostly Black African networks, showing how our non-Black networks devalue Black life. A bit of traffic was disrupted. Some people wanting to act on their anger were counselled by others to not act. It was a contained anger vibe, as the cops stood passively protecting the cop shop or directing traffic. From the start, cops were in small groups, observing but facilitating a planned protest. After words died down at the cop shop, we were on the way back to Footscray, over the rail bridge on Nicholson St. Some of us heard a clang. A white cop had his baton out and was trying to bash a Black man. The initial context for this is missing, but we heard the man was yelling at the cop before the cop started bashing him. From here about 30 or so members of the crowd rushed the cops who had to retreat along Irving St all the way back to Footscray station. This moment felt necessary to stop the bashing. It was powerful to see the cops on the back foot. Some people got out some trash and dumped it in the street. Someone threw a glass bottle towards the cops. The Black man who was getting bashed resisted the racist cop further. Meanwhile, some of the bigger part of the crowd back near the bridge obstructed the movement of the highway patrol car trying to manoeuvre to contain the rupture. Cops had retreated into a formed line near the station. Simultaneously many protest initiators and crowd members quelled the rising anger much of the crowd acted on. They intervened into this resistive moment to defuse its potential. They held people back. They cleaned up the rubbish. They told people to sit down, not stand up. They disowned the Black man resisting the racist cop, as well as other people masked up who were accused of being ‘cops’. It was not what we were here for. Apparently. But what were we here for? The next day we learned this white cop was wearing a ‘Thin Blue Line’ patch, signalling his white supremacist politics more explicitly than other cops. Cops had deployed their contradictory ‘manage community tensions’ strategy. Normal clothes cops in small groups passively policed and facilitated the rally, before some cops escalated things. Meanwhile, there were riot cops out of sight but around the corner just in case things kicked off. T…
