---
title: "A Conversation with Charles Malato"
author: "Charles Malato"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/charles-malato-a-conversation-with-charles-malato"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated from the French by Michael Shreve. Originally in Le Matin, February 28 1894 http://michaelshreve.wordpress.com/2012/09/09/a-conversation-with-charles-malato/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "charles-malato-a-conversation-with-charles-malato.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/charles-malato-a-conversation-with-charles-malato.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       London, February 27. From our Special Envoy.        The Clubs        At Malato’s        1871–1894        The Movement        The Finer Points        A Legal Crime After Mecca, Jerusalem and Rome—London! Today London has become an anarchist holy city. Here the militant “companions” have come to fraternize in their miserable exile, thrown out or chased off the continent. Today there are around a thousand of them on the shores of the Thames, mostly French, Italian and Czech. Next come the Swiss and Belgians. As for the Spaniards, they are represented by only two or three revolutionaries, which might seem surprising given the hunt for anarchists that has taken place on the Iberian Peninsula over the past four months. Finally there are many Russian Jews. The most remarkable of the Slavs is indisputably Prince Kropotkine, a first rate philosopher and scholar but who lives very secluded. He lives in Acton, a London suburb, with his wife and daughter Sacha, in a modest little house that he hardly ever leaves, really only to go work in the library of the British Museum. Stepniak, once a famous terrorist, devotes himself now to propaganda by the pen for Free Russia , a paper sent clandestinely into Russia. However, he is not an anarchist but rather a social democrat. Finally it would not be right to forget the… English anarchists, even though they are, as their counterparts on the continent admit, more like theologians than dynamiters. They form two groups that each takes their name from the newspaper they publish: Freedom and Commonwealth . Their main orators are Mowbray, Samuels and Nicholl. The Autonomy club, which now has the honor of being famous, was founded by the German companions a dozen years ago. It consists of a long, narrow hall used for conferences and balls, a bar whose walls are plastered with revolutionary posters, and a few other rather cramped rooms. Originally created on Whitfield Street, it has since been transferred close by to Windmill Street, right near the main thoroughfare of Tottenham Court Road. It is smack in the middle of the French quarter and has as many French regulars as German. It is entirely anarchist. The Graiton Hall club, which is just as famous of late, is independent socialist. More fashionable and especially bigger, it counts among its members not only revolutionaries of different stripes, but also the dandies that come on Saturdays, Sundays and Monday evenings to enjoy the two-step waltz. The grand ballroom that is used for both the choreographic entertainment and for public meetings can hold 1,200 people. The walls are decorated with that call that ends Karl Marx’ famous manifesto, written in every European language: “Workers of all countries, Unite!” It is, however, in another club, the one on Tottenham Street, where the real gospel of Marx is preached. The old friend of the German sociologist, Frederic Engels, who has lived in London for a number of years, graces it with his presence. On Tottenham Street the club is completely authoritarian communist. After a little research, I went to see an anarchist considered by his friends to be as far from the staunch individualists as he is from the pompous theoreticians. Monsieur Charles Malato, whom we met once in the Pavillon of the Princes in Sainte-Pélagie [a Parisian prison], is a writer for the cause with virulent ideas but not a very savage appearance. He did not, however, welcome me with open arms. “Are you annoyed that I asked you to talk to me, to tell me something that a militant can honestly say, about the anarchist movement in London?” “But,” he answered, “you have here a Mr. Melville, inspector at Scotland Yard (the police department), who’ll be able to accommodate you better than I. You’re wonderful! Your newspapers treat me everyday like a wild madman, a coward and bandit, demanding that they deport me or exterminate me and then you come here, sweet as can be, to ask for an interview.” “Come now, my dear colleague,” (Monsieur M…
