---
title: "Fire and Fury in the Time of Trump"
author: "Wayne Price"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-price-fire-and-fury-in-the-time-of-trump"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Anarchist Review of Michael Wolff, Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wayne-price-fire-and-fury-in-the-time-of-trump.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-price-fire-and-fury-in-the-time-of-trump.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Trumpism is Republicanism        The “Lesser Evil” Democrats If not the best book on the crazed Trump administration, this is certainly the most popular. Perhaps because it focuses on Donald Trump’s personal peculiarities rather than the political context, it has become a top best seller. It has been criticized because the author, Michael Wolff, says that he sometimes listened to contradictory reports of various events, given by the unreliable members of the administration, and then used his own judgment in integrating these reports into unified accounts. While this may lead us to wonder how accurate his reportage of specific White House events may be, there is no doubt that his overall account is accurate. It fits very well with what we have seen of Trump and his agents as they have acted out in public, in front of cameras and newspaper reporters. Through his own observations of the president, and through the reports of Trump’s allies, supporters, family members, and minions, Wolff draws a picture of his behavior and personality. Trump is thin-skinned and easily hurt by criticism, desiring always to be liked and admired, yet insensitive to others’ feelings, desires, and needs. He is impulsive, and easily aroused to anger. He is highly distractible, unable to concentrate for extended periods, and readily bored. He has a need to constantly be winning. Women are seen by him as merely sex objects or as aides to his work if they are sufficiently obsequious—but then he sees everyone as objects, useful to him or not. Trump knows very little and is generally incurious, including about what he should know to manage the presidency. He lies constantly, not necessarily for specific purposes but just for the sake of it. However, he may not know when he is lying, since he lives in a fantasy world of his own making, an alternate reality which is immune to facts. Most of those around him regard him as stupid (although it is hard to say if this is due to limited intelligence or to a personality-based unwillingness to think—or both). “ Trump didn’t read. He didn’t really even skim…Some believed that …he was no more than semiliterate….Some thought him dyslexic….He didn’t listen. He preferred to be the person talking.” (113-4) He develops his views mostly through watching right wing television. “Rupert Murdoch [was]…certain Trump was a charlatan and a fool.” (19) “The people who knew him best” regarded him as “careless, capricious, disloyal, far beyond any sort of control.” (223) “… Senior staff believed the president had a problem with reality ….” (242) Rex Tillerson, the Secretary of State, called Trump “ a fucking moron .” The Treasury Secretary, Steve Mnuchin regarded him as an “ idiot .” H.R. McMaster called him a “ dope. ” (304) All the senior staff belittled Trump’s intelligence, openly or quietly. “ Everyone…struggled to express the baldly obvious fact that the president did not know enough, did not know what he didn’t know, did not particularly care, and, to boot, was confident if not serene in his unquestioned certitudes .” (304) “… Staffers [were] concerned that his ability to stay focused, never great, had notably declined…. ” (309) These observable traits have led some mental health professionals—and other people who could pick up a psychiatric manual—to diagnose Trump with various personality disorders, even though they have not personally examined him. I am not going to do that, precisely because I am a licensed psychologist (although I would love to see his responses to the Rorschach Inkblots). His publicly observed behavior is terrible enough for us to say that he should not be in office. Trump has responded to these reports by asserting that he is really “ a stable genius .” Wolff focuses almost entirely on these personal traits of Trump and of those around him. These others are also more or less batty in behavior, the administration being full of crackpots, clowns, ignoramuses, right-wing ideologues, and other strange p…
