---
title: "Achievements of the new government"
author: "Rev Dia"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rev-dia-achievements-of-the-new-government"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 26th January 2022 from a translation of revdia.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rev-dia-achievements-of-the-new-government.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rev-dia-achievements-of-the-new-government.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Language        Faith        Army        Economy        After the Revolution In just three months, on March 31, 2019, general elections will take place in Ukraine. The current government came to power in the wake of the revolution. Now we have the opportunity to look back and assess the main “achievements” of our leadership. In the election slogans, the government itself makes three of its main achievements: — “Faith, language, army.” Ukraine has been pursuing a policy of fighting windmills for several years now. Streets are being renamed en masse, quotas are being given for Ukrainian-language projects on radio and television. Of course, there is nothing wrong with that, but changing the signs does not change the essence. Officials can wear embroidered shirts as much as they want, learn the language, show off their achievements in renaming streets, but they remain thieves. Thieves who create only information noise, imitating the struggle for Ukrainian culture to hide their thieving nature behind an embroidered shirt. Ukraine, no matter what nationalists say, is a multinational country, we have representatives of many nations and, most importantly, language groups. And politics obsessed with nationalism fuels separatist sentiments well. Hungarians, Crimean Tatars, Belarusians, Russians are also full-fledged residents of our country, and have a huge percentage of the total population. Imagine if one of the officials dares to restrict Ukrainians in some way, such as the opportunity to study in their own language, nationalists immediately mobilize to smash something. Not surprisingly, when the government carries out reforms that oppress the right to education in one’s own language for Hungarians in favor of populism, it causes a flurry of discontent among them, and separatist sentiment begins to grow. The policy of our officials only adds fuel to the fire of national conflicts. We already have many individuals who, based on propaganda, have stopped considering Russians to be people. The Russian authorities are certainly pure evil, torturing their own people, but so many Russians, including Russian anarchists, have given their lives and health in the fight against the regime. The policy of our government, active nationalist propaganda, creates an excellent ground for the growth of xenophobia, and by no means the unity of the people. All this Ukrainization is nothing more than a screen under which officials continue to do their dark deeds, fueling separatist and xenophobic sentiments. The main event this year was the creation of its own Orthodox Church. Poroshenko took this credit for himself and activated a powerful propaganda machine that praises him for this huge loss. And here the problem of oppression was joined by the problem of faith at the level of language and culture. Thanks to the effective propaganda that the ROC is the FSB agents and the corresponding propaganda from the ROC that the Ukrainians and the Ecumenical Patriarch himself have deviated from the righteous path, the event has caused a new wave of religious hatred. There is no need to explain how acutely believers are experiencing these events. The conflict over the split between the Moscow and Kyiv patriarchates before the intervention of politicians was almost imperceptible. Now nationalists, wherever possible, accuse people who simply went to the church their parents went to, work for the FSB, interfere with worship, and conflict with the redistribution of churches is growing. Cyril, of course, is a vile person, but it was our government that did the most to make people hostile to each other. Searches in churches, interrogations of priests and redistribution of churches do not help to strengthen the faith of different denominations. The church leadership, in turn, has demonstrated how it can flexibly change its statutes under the dictates of politicians. In sum, the issue of faith has not been resolved, and state intervention has only exacerbated interfa…
