---
title: "Elena Purgatorio; or, A Brief History of the Galleanisti"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-transmetropolitan-review-elena-purgatorio-or-a-brief-history-of-the-galleanisti"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "See also The Complete Works of Elena Purgatorio at &lt;thetransmetropolitanreview.files.wordpress.com&gt; (PDF). Retrieved on 18 March 2024 from thetransmetropolitanreview.wordpress.com."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-transmetropolitan-review-elena-purgatorio-or-a-brief-history-of-the-galleanisti.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-transmetropolitan-review-elena-purgatorio-or-a-brief-history-of-the-galleanisti.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I: The Marriage of Elena and Ubaldo        II: The Coal Agitators        III: Heart of the Cascades        IV: The Couple Form        V: Back In Kansas        VI: We’re Not In Kansas Anymore        VII: Somewhere Over The Rainbow        VIII: The Flying Monkeys        IX: The Wicked Witches        X: There’s A Land That I Heard Of        XI: The Tin Man        XII: The Coal War        XIII: The Coal Miner’s Wife Keep up with me and let the people talk! Be like a solid tower whose brave height remains unmoved by all the winds that blow; one who lets their thoughts be turned aside by one thing or another will lose sight of their true goal, their mind sapped of all its strength. – Purgatorio (Canto V, 13-18), Dante Alighieri, 1321 Like most anarchist women, we know very little about Elena Purgatorio. She was born Elena Alfonsi on August 4, 1891 in the ancient town of Gualdo Tadino, nestled beneath the Perugian mountains in the center of the Italian peninsula. Along with thousands of others, Elena left Italy and immigrated across the Atlantic to the US, registering under her birth name at Ellis Island, New York on August 17, 1907. She was sixteen years old, and seemingly alone. Her father Eugenio had arrived the year before with her brother Carlo, although little is known about them, and it appears the rest of the Alfonsi family emigrated to the US in the years to come. It’s unclear exactly why Elena left Italy, but months before her arrival, history recorded the appearance of a man destined to play a great role in Elena’s life, a man named Ubaldo Purgatorio. In the February 9, 1907 issue of Cronaca Sovversiva , the Italian insurrectionary anarchist newspaper, we can see that Ubaldo Purgatorio donated 25 cents to the editors, along with nearly two dozen other Italian anarchists who lived in Frontenac, Kansas. Together, these men and women contributed $6.25 to the most important anarchist paper of its time. Frontenac, Kansas was a coal mining town back then, the site of a horrific mine explosion in 1888 where 44 mostly Italian miners were killed by ignited coal dust. In the years that followed, Frontenac became an anarchist hotbed, attested to by its mentions in the Cronaca , the first of which is from June 24, 1905, when the anarchists L. Cipelli and G. Rosa donated a collective $2 to the paper. Nearly a year later, the Frontenac anarchist group was at least thirteen members strong, including one G. Bianchi, who will appear again in this narrative. In the March 10, 1906 issue, we find a brief article written from Frontenac by L. Cipelli, which informed the reader that not only did the anarchists have a Social Studies Club in town, but that this Club was being mercilessly harassed by a self-professed dangerous anarchist , a old-time superman in ‘64 , and Cipelli claimed that the love we bring to the truth and the desire we have for the realization of our ideal pushes us to not keep quiet about the wounds that torment us and to invoke the disinfectant that protects us from the rodent virus. This same March 10, 1906 issue also featured an anarchist named G. Galeotti donating $1 from Frontenac, and in the April 21 issue of Cronaca , this same G. Galeotti wrote an entry about Frontenac and the recent coal miners’ strike, of which his anarchist group took part. This snarky article explained how Pope Mitchell , the Anglo leader of the Union, forced the striking miners to obey the most scrupulous legality before ordering them back to work. During the course of the Frontenac strike, the mine-owners suffered nothing, having enough coal stockpiled to remain profitable for months, and before the miners legally won any concessions, the Union had its members sent down into the shafts to extract new coal from the mines, which in due course can be sent to the market . This angered the Italian miners, so they held a mass-march to the Gobbo mine where some of their comrades arrived with rifles, given they were returning from hunting. This di…
