---
title: "Domingos Passos – the Brazilian Bakunin"
author: "Alexandre Samis, Renato Ramos"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renato-ramos-and-alexandre-samis-domingos-passos-the-brazilian-bakunin"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by Paul Sharkey Retrieved on 25th February 2021 from www.katesharpleylibrary.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "renato-ramos-and-alexandre-samis-domingos-passos-the-brazilian-bakunin.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renato-ramos-and-alexandre-samis-domingos-passos-the-brazilian-bakunin.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A Young Anarchist Militant        High Hopes and Political Shifts        A Driving Force        São Paulo and Imprisonment A union militant, carpenter by trade, and renowned orator and agitator, Domingo Passos stands out as a figure of early 20 th century anarchism in Brazil. While a more detailed profile of Passos, yet alone a contemporary and comprehensive account of Brazilian anarchism, has yet to be published in English we do recommend the 1973 “Anarchists and Communists in Brazil 1900–1935” by John W. F. Dulles. Read a short overview here and find more references in the Wikipedia entry on anarchism in Brazil. This piece on Domingo Passos was published as part of the Black Anarchism reader. ‘I woke at 5.00 am. Passos, who had been up and about for hours, was sitting on his bed reading Determinism and Responsibility by Hamon. I grabbed a towel and went downstairs to wash my face. When I came back from the yard, after drying off, I saw two individuals. It was a moment or two before I realized who they were. With revolvers drawn they spoke to me and asked me harshly: “Where’s Domingos Passos?” Anticipating another of the attacks that our comrade had been through so often before, I was keen to cover for him and said that he was not around. I told them: “There’s no Domingos Passos living here!” This brief extract from a 16 March 1923 declaration by the workman Orlando Simoneck, carried in the newspaper A Patria, clearly reflects a few features of the situation sampled by the Black youngster, carpenter by trade, anarchist and active member of the Civil Construction Workers’ Union (UOCC): by 1923 ‘Comrade Passos’ had become a special target for the Rio police as well as one of the best loved and respected worker militants in the (then) Federal District. Another feature of this comrade, rightly identified by Simoneck, was his relentless self-educational drive, his thirst for learning and culture, which found him spending his mornings poring over books in the little collection belonging to Florentino de Carvalho who lived in the same house in the Rua Barão in São Félix, only a couple of paces from the union local. We do not know the precise year of Passos’s birth (it was probably towards the end of the 19 th century), but, from the books of Edgar Rodrigues, we know that he was born in Rio de Janeiro state. We find his first appearance in social struggles of the time as a UOCC delegate at the 3 rd Brazilian Workers’ Congress (1920) at which he was elected as travel secretary for the Brazilian Workers’ Confederation (COB). Passos had been selected for that post because he stood out in the ranks of the organised proletariat on account of his intellect and oratorical gifts which he had honed in the day to day struggles of his trade. In 1920 Passos worked with the Rio de Janeiro Workers’ Federation (FORJ) which had a daily newspaper in A Voz do Povo. Under the Epitácio Pessoa government, there was a severe crackdown with countless anarchist militants being jailed, tortured and murdered, trades unions shut down and labor newspapers pulped. In October 1920, the police dispersed a workers’ parade down the Avenida Rio Branco with gunfire and, not content with that, stormed the UOCC headquarters, wounding 5 workers and rounding up a further 30. The labor movement was reeling from the onslaught and went into a decline from 1921 on. The ‘yellow’ unions expanded rapidly and came to contest hegemony in several trades with the revolutionary unions. Among anarchists, the high hopes vested in the Russian revolution were evaporating as news percolated through of the Bolsheviks’ repressiveness. On 16 March 1922, nine days ahead of the launching of the Communist Party of Brazil, the UOCC carried a document entitled ‘Refuting the False Claims of the Communist Group’ and declaring its repudiation of the state communists, the ‘Bolshevists’. It was assuredly written by Domingos Passos. Throughout the 1920s Civil Construction workers were the steeli…
