---
title: "Belarussian Anarchist Federation"
author: "Belarussian Anarchist Federation, International of Anarchist Federations"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/belarussian-anarchist-federation-belarussian-anarchist-federation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-04-02 from www.i-f-a.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "belarussian-anarchist-federation-belarussian-anarchist-federation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/belarussian-anarchist-federation-belarussian-anarchist-federation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       How did you get involved in anarchism? How did you first hear about it?        How did you learn about anarchism in Belarus? What did you read?        So there was a federation of anarchists at that time?        So how did things develop from there?        Who were these other anarchists? Were they from the federation?        What attracted you to anarchist ideas?        Maryna, when did you start becoming an anarchist?        How many anarchists are there in Belarus?        After you had the student actions, what did you do? Were you more involved in the federation?        Is it like in Poland?        Why do you think humour is such a good weapon?        Were you at all influenced by the street parties in the west, like Reclaim the Streets?        After you did these initial actions, what happened next?        What about your paper?        Did you do this along with the street parties and ‘happenings’?        Where did you get the idea of this newspaper?        And was it mainly popular amongst young people?        What is your circulation? Do you sell it?        What happened to the paper?        What do you now?        How big is the movement now?        Have you been able to maintain an interest amongst young people as they have become older and because of the repression?        What do you think is the most important activity to do now?        What do you think about the other organisations that you have come in contact with when you have been abroad?        FAB Congress 2005 Two comrades, Pauluk and Maryna, from the Belarusian Anarchist Federation, an organisation then applying to join the International, attended the meeting and made a presentation on the situation in their country at the London Anarchist Bookfair. The collapse of the Soviet Union has resulted in yet another repressive regime taking power, making it extremely difficult for ana rchists and others to operate politic ally. This interview focuses on the history of anarchism in Belarus, as se en through the personal experiences of these two comrades. It provides insig hts into the situation for anarchists in the ex-Soviet influenced countries and shows how anarchist ideas and practices emerge in places where there has not been a strong anarchist tradition in recent years. The works of our comr ades also illustrates how people in diffe rent situations take the ideas and mak e them their own, through creative and imaginative initiatives. Pauluk: I have been in the anarchist movement since 1994. All Soviet people, sooner or later, hear about anarchism . During our childhood, we watched f ilms about the Civil War and there wer e always anarchists in them. The pro paganda portrayed them negatively . But it had the opposite effect. The anarchists were shown as people w ho, in between fighting the Reds and Whites, were drinking and dancing. So from childhood we had the impression that anarchists were fun loving! I was impressed with the critical position towards the changes in the political system. Lukashenko, the current President, used the democratic movement to get elected and then the repression started. So I got the impression that the problem didn’t lie just with the democratic movement but was somewhere deeper. So I started to try and find out where the root of the problem was. I read about anarchism and by the end of 1994 I sympathised with anarchist ideas. Pauluk: I read about anarchism in the library; there were books by people like Kropotkin. But not much was available. We didn’t have contact with other anarchists either in the west or in other eastern European countries. There wasn’t even much communication with other anarchists in Belarus. Pauluk: Yes, already in 1992, founded by 8 people. There are still 6 of the original members involved. In 1994, there were about 20 people, but scattered around the country in just two cities so I didn’t hear about anarchism from them, but from books. Pauluk: In October 1994 students organised some actions agai…
