---
title: "The Chilean miners: fake solidarity in the land of “every man for himself”"
author: "Jose Antonio Gutiérrez Danton"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-the-chilean-miners-fake-solidarity-in-the-land-of-every-man-for-himsel"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 22nd December 2021 from www.anarkismo.net"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-the-chilean-miners-fake-solidarity-in-the-land-of-every-man-for-himsel.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jose-antonio-gutierrez-d-the-chilean-miners-fake-solidarity-in-the-land-of-every-man-for-himsel.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Like millions of others, I was absolutely delighted to see the trapped miners in the San José mine in Chile getting out alive from their stressful, claustrophobic confinement which they’d been in for almost 70 days as a result of negligence on the part of the mining companies. I could only be thrilled to see this terrible story of grief and suffering come to a happy ending and see tears exchanged for bursts of laughter. But at the same time, mixed with my joy at seeing these 33 condemned men return to life, I still had a feeling that was a mixture of revulsion and anger at the show put on by the very people who had dug what could have been these men’s graves. I have no wish to be a killjoy, but when the natural euphoria that has engulfed the country calms down, a great many questions will need to be asked. The first is that although the government is blatantly attempting to reap political credit for this miracle of the rescue of 33 men who were buried alive under tons of rock, 700 metres below the surface, the reality is that they never should have been buried in the first place! The mine had been closed for safety reasons and was reopened precisely because of the government policy that sacrifices workers’ safety, workers’ lives for the benefit of the entrepreneurial class. Moreover, at a time when both the government and the bosses were taking these men for dead, it was the tenacity of the miners themselves and their workmates who provided information and the benefit of their experience, that were responsible for keeping the search alive until they were found. The miners are alive not thanks to the Piñera government, but to the perseverance of the workers who pressured them into making the rescue a reality, and thanks to the expertise of the miners themselves who knew how deal with their situation underground. If it had been down to the government and the bosses, these miners would have been forgotten and abandoned like hundreds of other workers who every year are forgotten and abandoned when they die in accidents, the vast majority of which are preventable. But once the cameras arrived, the indifference was immediately forgotten, replaced by an almost feverish concern; the country and its ruling classes were struck by “Telethon syndrome”, all smiles for the cameras and hugs for the victims. But this is the sort of solidarity that tricks us, because it makes us forget that we live in a country where there is very, very little solidarity, a country where the “every man for himself” mentality was imposed on the inhabitants through the blood and fire of nearly four decades of rampant neoliberalism. It is fake solidarity because it is used to their own advantage — to increase their popularity ratings, for the sake of propaganda and marketing, to make political capital. Apple will give them I-pods, Farkas gives them 5 million pesos each [1] , some have offered holidays in the Greek islands, others the chance to see Real Madrid or Manchester United play, a third-class politician (who, incidentally, is the president) poses for pictures with them... everyone using them quite blatanly as propaganda for their product, sports club, country or government. I can’t stop feeling a bad taste in my mouth when I see how they are exploiting them in such a way. This is the extent to which the manipulation reaches, with Piñera calling on the world to remember Chile as the country that rescues and forget about the Pinochet dictatorship — which made him a billionaire, with wealth far beyond what the vast majority of people can even imagine. Think how the world would react if German Chancellor Angela Merkel asked the world to forget about Hitler. I cannot help feeling deep disgust at the vile opportunism of it all. But I’m not surprised. For better or for worse, it is part of the plans by the ruling block to wipe out the “original sin” of our exemplary democracy, to forget the authoritarian-dictatorial “slip up” that drowned the hopes of three gener…
