---
title: "The Anarchists"
author: "James Joll"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-joll-the-anarchists"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Second Edition Retrieved on 30th July 2020 from http://www.ditext.com/joll/anarchists.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "james-joll-the-anarchists.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-joll-the-anarchists.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Acknowledgements      Introduction    PART ONE      Chapter I: Heresy and reason        1        2      Chapter II: The myth of the Revolution        1        2    PART TWO      Chapter III: Reason and revolution: Proudhon        1        2        3      Chapter IV: Bakunin and the great schism        1        2        3    PART THREE      Chapter V: Terrorism and propaganda by the deed        1        2        3      Chapter VI: Saints and rebels        1        2      Chapter VII: The Revolution that failed      Chapter VIII: Anarchists and syndicalists        1        2        3      Chapter IX: Anarchists in action: Spain        1        2        3      Chapter X: Conclusion A work of synthesis of this kind necessarily owes much to the researches of others, and I should like to acknowledge my debt to all those authors cited in the notes and to apologize to them when I have used the facts they have discovered to support conclusions with which they may not agree. I am most grateful to my friends Raymond Carr, Hugh Thomas, and David Footman, who have given me invaluable advice on the sections of the book dealing with Spain and Russia and who have saved me from many errors. 1 am additionally indebted to Mr Raymond Carr for allowing me to see before publication parts of his volume on Spain for the Oxford History of Modern Europe. Mr Marshall Shatz, of Columbia University, New York, was also kind enough to let me use an unpublished paper on anarchists in Russia. I should also like to thank the many people who have helped me with their ideas and suggestions, and especially Mr Ivan Avakumovic, Professor Sir Isaiah Berlin, Dr C-P Clasen, Sir F. W. Deakin, Dr Arthur Lehning, M. Jean Maitron, Mme Federica Montseny, Mr Bertil Oilman, Dr Saul Rose, Mr Christopher Seton-Watson, and Dr Theodore Zeldin. I am also very grateful to Miss Mary Worthington, Mrs Jane Wilson and Mrs Irene Leon for valuable secretarial help. In revising the work for the second edition, I have benefited from the advice and criticism of a number of reviewers and correspondents who commented on the original edition, and of many people with whom I have subsequently discussed the subject. I should especially like to thank Professor David Apter, Professor Paul Avrich, Dame Margaret Cole, Professor Michael Confino, Mr George Esenwein, Mr W. F. Fishman, Professor Marie Fleming, Dr Arthur Lehning, the late George Lichtheim, Dr Ruth Link-Salinger, Dr Iaacov Oved, Dr Paul Preston, Mr Walter Reinsdorf, Mr Fermin Rocker, Dr Joaquin Romero Maura, Professor C. Tsuzuki and Dr Robert Wistrich; and I am also indebted to the work of many scholars who have carried out research in the field since this book was first published. Mr Walter Reinsdorf has kindly given me permission to quote from the letter from August Reinsdorf on p. 122. ‘You are miserable isolated individuals. You are bankrupt. You have played out your role. Go where you belong, to the dustheap of history.’ Trotsky’s denunciation of his menshevik opponents in October 1917 is typical of a whole way of looking at history. According to this view, it is the causes which triumph that alone should interest the historian, and those movements and individuals which do not contribute to the forward march of the historical process are, it is held, rightly neglected and scorned, or dismissed as reactionary or blind. It is not the Marxists alone who have regarded history in this way; Christian historians have implied the same view about pagans, and liberal historians about conservatives. But it is unsuccessful revolutionaries who have been the chief victims of those historians who are only interested in success. When a revolution succeeds, historians are concerned to trace its roots and unravel its origins and development, so that, very often, the whole chain of events leading to it over many decades is represented as an inevitable process, and each idea or episode is judged by the extent to which it helped or hindered the fina…
