---
title: "Anti-Racism and Anti-colonialism"
author: "Nsámbu Za Suékama"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nsambu-za-suekama-anti-racism-and-anti-colonialism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Open Letter to my Black Kin"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "nsambu-za-suekama-anti-racism-and-anti-colonialism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/nsambu-za-suekama-anti-racism-and-anti-colonialism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Image description — Black and white photo with a fist raised in the Black Power salute. Some words in white lettering are laid over it, from Ashanti Alston, which read: “I think of being Black not so much as an ethnic category but as an oppositional force or touchstone for looking at situations differently. Black culture has always been oppositional and is all about finding ways to creatively resist oppression. So, when I speak of a Black anarchism, it is not so tied to the color of my skin but who I am as a person, as someone who can resist, who can see differently when I am stuck, and thus live differently.” At the bottom of the image we see a letter ‘A’ symbol in the Pan African colors (Red, Black, and Green). This is the Black Anarchic Radical emblem. Dear my fellow Black people, As conversations about #BlackLivesMatter continue, we must observe that not everyone is arriving at them at the same place. Some people are coming at it from an ‘anti-racist’ lens while others are coming at it from an ‘anti-colonial’ lens. This divergence in our community explains some of the fissures and disagreements about the nature/function of policing and the orientation of other institutions such as theatre, nonprofits, Black businesses, and more. Anti-racism will have you opposing ‘white supremacy’ while anticolonialism opposes the Western imperialism which births and grounds white supremacy. Anti-racism will challenge gender based stereotypes against Black people and the implications of these racist narratives on Black kinship structures and Black love; while anti-colonialism calls into question the legitimacy of the Western scientific model of gender and how that reinforces both a binary and hierarchical understanding of not just kinship and love but also of humanness itself. Anti-racism will call attention to the unfair health and career impacts of the idea that Black people ‘have to work twice as hard to get half as far’ while anti-colonialism calls into question the existence of a social ladder and hierarchy of access that forces us to scramble at bottom of the barrel for mete crumbs, all while leaving countless mostly disabled Black folk treated as disposable, worthless ‘drain on resources’ for being unable to work at the pace and in the behavioral standards white society imposes. Even more, while Anti-racism will cry out against the broader exclusion of most of our people from participation in the economy in the ways white people have had with no problem, anti-colonialism understands that the modern economy itself always excludes us because it is fundamentally fed on the global and continued exploitation of our people’s labor and lands for the material gain of capitalists and colonizer nations. Anti-racism will teach you not to demonize Afrikan social formations and cultures, to ‘respect them’ but wont ‘go too far’ in terms of advocating and fighting for African societies to more fully inhabit the earth in place of these hegemonically imposed European ones; meanwhile anti-colonialism demands both respect for our communities and it fights toward actual decolonization and the right for Afrikan autonomy over our communities’ food, health, education, defense, and other infrastructure needs. Anti-racism will have you acknowledge that the US and its institutions is founded on slavery and genocide but will not ever broach the possibility that this violent basis is not a thing of the past but is an ongoing mechanism of oppression – which means we must immediately and unabashedly destroy Amerikkka and prioritize decolonial self determination for Indigenous people in its stead. So, while anti-racism will critique racialist thinking, anti-colonial radicalism pushes us to work toward the abolition of the system which produces and is enhanced by racism — its material basis, which is a Euro-capitalist cisheteropatriarchal society. Because of this distinction, anti-racism is more likely to see policing as a problem of just race — that there aren’t …
