---
title: "A Vindication of Natural Diet"
author: "Percy Bysshe Shelley"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/percy-bysshe-shelley-a-vindication-of-natural-diet"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "http://www.animal-rights-library.com/texts-c/shelley01.htm"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "percy-bysshe-shelley-a-vindication-of-natural-diet.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/percy-bysshe-shelley-a-vindication-of-natural-diet.epub"
    hosted: false
---

I hold that the depravity of the physical and moral nature of man originated in his unnatural habits of life. The origin of man, like that of the universe of which he is a part, is enveloped in impenetrable mystery. His generations either had a beginning, or they had not. The weight of evidence in favour of each of these suppositions seems tolerably equal; and it is perfectly unimportant to the present argument which is assumed. The language spoken however by the mythology of nearly all religions seems to prove, that at some distant period man forsook the path of nature, and sacrificed the purity and happiness of his being to unnatural appetites. The date of this event, seems to have also been that of some great change in the climates of the earth, with which it has an obvious correspondence. The allegory of Adam and Eve eating of the tree of evil, and entailing upon their posterity the wrath of God, and the loss of everlasting life, admits of no other explanation, than the disease and crime that have flowed from unnatural diet. Milton was so well aware of this, that he makes Raphael thus exhibit to Adam the consequence of his disobedience. Immediately a place, Before his eyes appeared: sad, noisome, dark: A lazar-house it seem'd; wherein were laid Numbers of all diseased: all maladies Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds, Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs, Intestine stone and ulcer, cholic pangs, Dæmoniac frenzy, moping melancholy, And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy, Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence, Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums. And how many thousand more might not be added to this frightful catalogue! The story of Prometheus, is one likewise which, although universally admitted to be allegorical, has never been satisfactorily explained. Prometheus stole fire from heaven, and was chained for this crime to mount Caucasus, where a vulture continually devoured his liver, that grew to meet its hunger. - Hesiod says, that before the time of Prometheus, mankind were exempt from suffering; that they enjoyed a vigorous youth, and that death, when at length it came, approached like sleep, and gently closed their eyes. - Again, so general was this opinion, that Horace, a poet of the Augustan age, writes- Audax omnia perpeti, Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas, Audax Iapeti genus, Ignem fraude mala gentibus intulit, Post ignem ætheriâ domo, Subductum, macies et nova febrium, Terris incubuit cohors Semotique prius tarda necessitas, Lethi corripuit gradum.- How plain a language is spoken by all this. - Prometheus, (who represents the human race) effected some great change in the condition of his nature, and applied fire to culinary purposes; thus inventing an expedient for screening from his disgust the horrors of the shambles. From this moment his vitals were devoured by the vulture of disease. It consumed his being in every shape of its loathsome and infinite variety, inducing the soul-quelling sinkings of premature and violent death. All vice arose from the ruin of healthful innocence. Tyranny, superstition, commerce, and inequality, were then first known, when reason vainly attempted to guide the wanderings of exacerbated passion. I conclude this part of the subject with an extract from Mr. Newton’s Defence of Vegetable Regimen, from whom I have borrowed this interpretation of the fable of Prometheus. “Making allowance for such transposition of the events of the allegory, as time might produce after the important truths were forgotten, which the portion of the antient mythology was intended to transmit, the drift of the fable seems to be this: - Man at his creation was endowed with the gift of perpetual youth; that is, he was not formed to be a sickly suffering creature as we now see him, but to enjoy health, and to sink by slow degrees into the bosom of his parent earth without disease or pain. Prometheus first taught the use of animal food ( primus …
