---
title: "The Black Cat Is Awake"
author: "Larry Gambone, Bénédicte Rallu"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/benedicte-rallu-the-black-cat-is-awake"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translation and footnotes by Larry Gambone. Originally published in Politis. Retrieved on 5th September 2024 from porkupineblog.blogspot.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "benedicte-rallu-the-black-cat-is-awake.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/benedicte-rallu-the-black-cat-is-awake.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The Confédération nationale du Travail (CNT-F) [1] is undergoing a revival, due in particular to disaffection with the larger union federations. Meet the members of this trade union which stands for self-management and direct action. A black cat with hair standing on end, back arched as a sign of anger... In the March demonstrations, one saw the famous black and red CNT flag waving. One could also notice the significant number demonstrators in its ranks, in particular young people. A significant revival, which delights the old militants and gives weight to their arguments. “If nobody works in your place, nobody decides in your place” This slogan summarizes the operation of the CNT-F for Étienne Dechamps, militant since 1968 of the revolutionary trade union. No hierarchy, “each member has the same authority”. Self-management and direct democracy are the precepts. The general assembly is sovereign. “It is a form of control of each one for each one, we won’t work for the bosses as individuals”, stated Fabrice Christmas, regional secretary of d’Île-de-France. “All is open to debate, including subjects which, perhaps, do not deserve it”, analyzes Étienne. Each decision is made by consensus, “And that makes for real militancy! But what can kill the CNT-F, would be to become monolithic ” To adhere to the CNT-F is not to sit around relaxing. Meetings, brain storming sessions, actions, many activities go on outside the work hours. The CNT-F rejects permanent officials, refuses to professionnalize trade unionism and to allow itself to be cut off from the base. Each member adds his contribution. The union helps create militants out of those who are not accustomed to be militant. The CNT-F also helped “to make each individual more autonomous”, adds Paco Munoz, pensioner and member for four decades, after a childhood raised in Spanish anarcho-syndicalism: his parents were opponents of Franco. “In the end, it is the improvement of material conditions and ethics, but also to create areas of emancipation” Paradoxically, a danger for the future of the CNT-F would be to develop too fast. That would complicate its democratic operation. With 4,000 militants, the confederation remains a number of small groups. [2] But it is it less and less so. “The more one is numerous, the more consensus is difficult to reach, the more it is difficult to be democratic, because the number of intermediaries increases”, deplores Étienne. However, the CNT-F could attract more and more militants, divorced from the traditional trade-union centrals. “In the ten years to come, there will be a rebirth of class struggle unionism of which the CNT-F could play a part”, predicted Emmanuel Coral, 46, ex-CFDT. [3] There are many, like Emmanuel, who criticize “these conglomerates of corrupted notables”. The apparatchiks have professionnalised the trade unions and care more about their own situation than their members. When Emmanuel was laid off, he felt abandoned by his union. “I did not interest them anymore because I was no longer working, I was unemployed. The CFDT has little involvement in in the struggles of the unemployed ” The confederal secretary of the CNT-F, Jean-François Grez, felt the same thing in 1988 at the time of the strikes of the postal and telecommunications authorities. Edmond Mayor, secretary-general of CFDT, had treated the members of the CNT-F as a bunch of “black sheep”. Éric Derennes has been with the CNT-F since January 2002. Political militant for a long time, he was close for a while to the CFTC. [4] But, when it came time to join, he felt a hostile environment, little open to new comers: “I had the impression I was disturbing them.” All have found with the CNT-F a space of freedom, openness, where militants often meet (because of absence of hierarchy), an antiautoritian sense especially independent of the political parties. The Anarchist Federation tries hard to gather up members from time to time, but the CNT-F is not defined as anarchist. Only re…
