---
title: "The Field Guide to Anti-Hunting"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2012"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-field-guide-to-anti-hunting"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Typed out from a 1990s pamphlet on sabotaging hunting. Some parts were modernized by the editor (the use of a MP3 player and the trail camera.) The Field Guide To Anti-Hunting, Pamphlet, Anonymous, 1991"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-the-field-guide-to-anti-hunting.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-field-guide-to-anti-hunting.epub"
    hosted: false
---

         Locating Areas Where People Hunt:          Disabling Tree Stands:          Disabling Deer Feeders:          Blinds:          Active Sabotage: Note: This guide is meant to be a source of information for those wanting to disrupt local hunting in their areas. This guide has been made due to the lack of information on disrupting hunting. The material in this book is based on firsthand experience of sabotaging the hunting in North America, although its contents could be easily adapted for use in the other areas of the world. Legal Disclaimer: This guide is for your entertainment, information, and general interest only. It is not meant to encourage the activities described within. We’re just writing this for the heck of it. We would never dream of encouraging someone to use the proven-effective methods presented within to free innocent beings from the depths of hell, or to destroy the tools used to torture, mutilate, and murder them. We’d much prefer you sit at home watching TV and remain apathetic. (please commit the multiple felonies this guide advises you to do that way you can be a worse person than the hunters you wish to stop) * * * Hunting is one of the only legal blood sports left, and results in the death of 200 million animals yearly, and wounds and maims countless others. Thousands of people, hunters and hikers alike, die yearly in accidents involving falling from tree stands, shooting at objects believed to be “game animals”. Hunting also causes damage to the ecosystem by disrupting the natural balance of predator and prey. Luckily, hunting can easily be stopped by following the simple and field tested tactics described in this book. These tactics have been refined over years of experience, and can be used by anyone wanting to stop the murder of innocent creatures in their own area. The first thing one must do when planning to bring their local hunting season is to find out where people do the actual hunting. This can be accomplished in many ways. The most practical is to simply drive (or bike) around in the early morning in forested areas on opening day, or on a weekend in hunting season. You will be looking for cars parked on the side of the road during the early mornings of weekends in hunting season. You would be surprised how many cars you will find along the edge of the road belonging to hunters. Mark any areas where you observe vehicles on a map with an “x” and return to those spots at a later date when no one is around. A quick reconnaissance is generally all that is needed to reveal if the hunters are in the area by simply checking to see if a vehicle is parked in the vicinity of where you saw one during your weekend scouting. You can also scout out forests a few days prior to season to look for hunting blinds, tree stands or deer feeders that have been set up early for the upcoming season. A successful hunt saboteur will carefully scout out areas of forest preseason, in hopes of finding a tree stand. (Locating tree stands on foot will be described in detail later in the pamphlet.) A third way is to contact your local Department of Conservation, and see what government lands are being used for hunting, but most hunting is done on private lands. The guaranteed and most effective way to stop hunting is to destroy the blinds or tree stands when the hunters are away. The amount of people hunting increases dramatically on the weekends, and then it shallows out during the week when the hunters have to head back to work. Hunters can typically be found hunting from 1 hour before sunrise, to one hour after sunset. Any longer and they are probably poachers. Once you are in an area with a tree stand when nobody is around, you can vent your frustrations on it in any way you can imagine, just try to be as quiet as possible if you are close to any houses, or a road. A homemade, wooden tree stand can be secured to a tree using a ratchet strap. All that is necessary to do to this tree stand is to cut the ratchet strap,…
