---
title: "The Explosion Point of Israeli Contradictions"
author: "Il Lato Cattivo"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/il-lato-cattivo-the-explosion-point-of-israeli-contradictions"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Ten theses on the ongoing upheavals in the Middle East"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "il-lato-cattivo-the-explosion-point-of-israeli-contradictions.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/il-lato-cattivo-the-explosion-point-of-israeli-contradictions.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A minor editorial note        I.        II.        III.        IV.        V.        VI.        VII.        VIII.        IX.        X. The following is a rough translation of Il Lato Cattivo ’s “The explosion point of Israeli contradictions.” We offer it as a supplementary, if imperfect, analysis of the unfolding crisis in Gaza. Il Lato Cattivo (“The Bad Side”) is a communist magazine, published in Italian, associated with the “communization” current. From their website: “ Il Lato Cattivo is a magazine that is edited by a small group of individuals, formed between 2010 and 2011, in the wake of the Greek crisis and revolt of December 2008, and on the basic idea that these two events (in particular) would have given new meaning to the word “revolution”, reactivating the actually complex and non-automatic, but nevertheless existing, link between crisis and communism.” On the consideration of Palestine, Il Lato Cattivo has been… uneven. In the wake of the 2014 “Gaza War” (what the IDF referred to as “Operation Protective Edge”), Il Lato Cattivo published “Letter on anti-Zionism,” in which they purport to offer a critique of anti-Zionism. The real content of the analysis is equivocation, which they present in the face of the massive assualt on Gaza. Anti-zionism is reduced to a caricature, at best, and equated with anti-semitism at worst. Their overall point is rather banal: to truly achieve liberation in Palestine would require a communist revolution. What they smuggle in, perhaps inadvertantly, is the tacit but often explicit notion of “No War but Class War,” which suggests that Palestinian struggle, or even solidarity, is a form of false consciousness, or mystification of the real social relations at play. This is rather typical of the European “ultra-left,” which often mistakes concrete processes of racialization and racialized revolt for the pitfalls of “petite bourgeois” mediation. This is the tenor with which they tend to deploy the critique of the “nation” and “nationalism.” To hear it, we must not be seduced by the ephemera of “the working class.” What matters is the real composition of struggle, always concrete, always fragmented, and fraught with the historical inheritances of capital, colony, race, nation, war, displacement, and, in the case of Palestine, dispossession and settler colonialism. “The Explosion Point of Israeli Contradictions” better achives these latter types of considerations. Il Lato Cattivo provide a much more astute analysis here than in their more parochial writing following the 2014 “Gaza War.” The real meaning of the deluge (the Al-Aqsa Flood) is revealed for what it is: a rupture with the daily life of Israeli occupation, which presents itself to the world as invincible, impenetrable. We do not agree with every position or characterization here, but we find these theses to be a useful analytical supplement to inevitable chaos and noise of insurgence and militarization, and an antidote to the insipid condemnations, the moral platitudes, and jockying for position on display among the ‘left,’ especially the ‘activist’ milieu. We think this piece helps to provide clarity, at least, if not a course of action. For that, it might do better to follow the example of Palestinians, the actions that compose the deluge: the torched IDF tanks, shredded border walls, and burning embassies. decompositions October 2023 The offensive launched by Hamas on Israeli territory on October 7, 2023 and its immediate consequences represent, in our view, as of now, a major turning point in the economic, political and military developments in the Middle East. We do not write these words lightly, with indifference to the suffering of the victims and their loved ones or, worse, with sympathy for the indiscriminate use of violence against civilians. We simply believe that the analysis of events must necessarily make abstraction from these aspects in order to properly appreciate their significance. It is not possible to fav…
