---
title: "Down with the Red Bourgeoisie of Yugoslavia"
author: "Black &amp; Red correspondents"
date: "2014"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/black-red-correspondents-down-with-the-red-bourgeoisie-of-yugoslavia"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Analysis of the June Students’ Insurrection in Belgrade, Yugoslavia"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "black-red-correspondents-down-with-the-red-bourgeoisie-of-yugoslavia.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/black-red-correspondents-down-with-the-red-bourgeoisie-of-yugoslavia.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Chronology Of Events        The Explosion        March on Belgrade        Mass Meeting        Occupation of the Faculties        Isolation of the Movement        Political Action Program          I.          II.        Rejection of Compromise        The Crisis and Tito’s Solution        Revolutionary program        Expulsion      SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JUNE EVENTS        Peasants        Workers        Students and Professors Alert readers of the Western press may have noted short accounts of a “student rebellion” during the first half of the month of June in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Beyond a few journalistic expressions of admiration for Tito’s handling of students, the press has been left dumb by the events; after all, one might expect a student revolt in Poland or Czechoslovakia, but in liberal Yugoslavia? As yet there exists no analysis of the events of June nor of their impact on Yugoslav society. In order to provide precisely such an analysis, let us begin by recounting what actually happened in Belgrade. A troop of actors was scheduled to perform free of charge on the second of June before an audience of “Youth-Action” workers camped nearby a large complex of student dormitories located in New Belgrade, a suburb of Belgrade. Student representatives had requested that the performance be held in a large open amphitheater so that those other than members of the Youth-Action could attend. Announcing that such free cultural events were the privilege of the Youth-Action only, the authorities scheduled the performance for a small theater. Angered by this, several students attempted to force their way into the theater before the performance, but after a short struggle were expelled by the police. News of the expulsion flashed through the student village and soon a crowd of over a thousand students gathered in front of the theater. -After only a few minutes of hesitation the crowd attacked the theater, breaking windows, ripping off the doors and fighting with those already inside. Police reinforcements arrived quickly with a fire truck, but before they could use the hoses, the students captured and burned it. With this, the police attacked. The students responded with barricades made of overturned automobiles and stones. After several violent clashes the students retreated to their dormitory village to discuss further action. Discussions lasting through the night produced a plan: the students would march the next morning in mass to a central square in downtown Belgrade. There they would place before the public the following demands: the immediate release of all students arrested in the previous day’s riot, the resignation of the chief of police, and the withdrawal of all the police from the student village in New Belgrade. On the morning of June third, three to four thousand students formed and began the ten kilometer march to downtown Belgrade. Approximately midway, they were met by a blockade of thousands of police gathered from all over the state of Serbia. As they neared the blockade, the President of the Parliament of Serbia and the President of the League of Communists stepped forward and invited the students to negotiate. But without warning, soon after negotiations had begun, the police opened fire with their pistols and charged the students. In the violent battle that ensued, 60 to 70 people were wounded, including the two government authorities who had attempted to negotiate with the students. That afternoon, ten thousand students met in New Belgrade and decided to form an “Action Committee” to achieve their demands. While this meeting was going on, in downtown Belgrade a group of several hundred students occupied the Philosophy and Sociology Faculty of the University of Belgrade. Later that afternoon, groups of students distributed, in the streets and cafes, leaflets seeking: (1) The rapid solution of the employment problem facing new university graduates, most of whom must go abroad if they want to find any sort…
