---
title: "Anarchism in the Face of Fascism and the Electoral Debate"
author: "Victor Khaled, Kauan Willian, Rafael Viana da Silva"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rafael-v-da-silva-kauan-willian-and-victor-khaled-anarchism-in-the-face-of-fascism-and-the-elec"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Translated by S Nicholas Nappalos, This article was originally published by Jacobin Brasil. Retrieved on May 24th, 2023 from blackrosefed.org/anarchism-in-the-face-of-fascism-and-the-electoral-debate."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "rafael-v-da-silva-kauan-willian-and-victor-khaled-anarchism-in-the-face-of-fascism-and-the-elec.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/rafael-v-da-silva-kauan-willian-and-victor-khaled-anarchism-in-the-face-of-fascism-and-the-elec.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The Pillars of Capitalist Domination        The History of Anarchism Against Reformism        The Real Polemics        Understanding Fascism to Crush It        A Mass Line Strategy        About the Authors        About the Translator With neither Bolsonaro (Liberal Party) nor Lula (Workers’ Party) able to secure an outright majority during the October 2 nd presidential election in Brazil, both advance to a run off election set to take place on October 30 th . There is a great deal of anxiety and tension surrounding the electoral process in the country, which has seen extreme political polarization not dissimilar to what is taking place in the United States. This article was written as a response to a prior piece also published in Jacobin Brasil titled “Anarchists in defense of the vote for Lula.” The previous article defended the tactical use of the vote to defeat Bolsonaro as a tool in the antifascist struggle, which is the principal theme the authors take up here. The authors of this article are associated with the Institute for Anarchist Theory and History , a project supported by Black Rose / Rosa Negra. “We are all obligated to live, more or less, in contradiction with our ideas; but we are socialists and anarchists precisely in the sense that we suffer with this contradiction and seek, so far as it’s possible, to shrink it. The day we adapt to this environment, of course, we would no longer have the desire to transform it, and we would become simply bourgeois; penniless bourgeois, perhaps, but no less bourgeois in deeds and intentions.” – Errico Malatesta “In my weekly speech in the Civil Construction Union, I will explain the anarchist concept of law, as a bourgeois creation and as a revolutionary creation. There are, in effect, two kinds of laws: those representing the pressure of the possessors on the non-possessors, and those representing the conquests of the non-possessors against their masters. These are laws imposed by revolutions, for example: the Magna Carta, the Declaration of the Rights of Men, the Law of 13 th of May, etc. […] But to get such laws, it was never necessary to have representatives in parliaments. Imposition takes place on the street, in factories, mines, work centers and barracks.”– José Oiticica This article is a response to the text “Anarchists in defense of the vote for Lula”, published in Jacobin Brasil on September 6, 2022. Anarchism has never been a dogma, but there is a deliberate confusion in thinking that, due to its anti-authoritarian stance, there are “as many anarchisms as anarchists”, and that anything defended by a self-styled anarchist has validity as part of “anarchism”. But this is not correct. Despite its diversity, when we look globally at the history of anarchism in its 150 years of struggle, we can extract a set of principles and elements that constituted it historically. To defend these principles and criticize reformist deviations – since anarchism has always had a revolutionary perspective – is not dogmatic or authoritarian. We cannot let others try to impose strategic perspectives on anarchism that are foreign to our ideology. Let’s start by talking about the Brazilian case of the experience of anarchism in the face of Varguism [1] and trade union corporatism. In 1930, in the midst of the political transformations that were taking place in Brazil with the rise of Getúlio Vargas to power, many unionists, socialists and anarchists – who had fought intensely the coronelista [2] policy known as the “coffee with milk Republic” [3] – came to welcome the new government. This is because, among other things, Varguism represented a fight against that prior political and economic phase, in addition to promoting some workers’ rights, which came from, at that point, the struggle of many militants. When a brutal repression against the most radical elements of the left was installed, together with the rise of union corporatism in an open confrontation with revolutionary trade un…
