---
title: "America and the Soviets"
author: "Alexander Berkman"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-america-and-the-soviets"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Online source RevoltLib.com, retrieved on November 17, 2020."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexander-berkman-america-and-the-soviets.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-america-and-the-soviets.epub"
    hosted: false
---

A great deal is being written now in the Soviet Press about the new American law against convict or forced labor. The United States has recently passed a statute according to which no goods can enter the country that are the product of unfree, forced or convict labor. The new law went into effect in January and there is much discussion in Russia, as well as in the United States, as to what effect the new legislation will [have] on Russian industrial conditions and on its foreign trade. The unusual feature of the law is that the burden of proof is laid upon the accused. That is, if Russia attempts to bring its manufactured goods into the United States, it will [be] up to the Soviets to prove that the goods are not the product of forced or convict labor. Thus, for instance, the United States needs only to charge the Russian importer with bringing in products of forced labor, and then the importer is at once placed under the greatest handicap. Practically it may be equal to debarring the Soviet imports, by burdening the importer with unusual and extraordinary difficulties, for it is almost impossible for Russia to prove that its products are made by “free” labor. Indeed, how can it be proven that a certain product is the result of free labor? This distinction between so-called “free” labor and “unfree or forced” labor opens the door for endless quibbling and hairsplitting. The interpretation of such a law will depend entirely on the attitude of a given judge or court. One unfriendly to the Soviets would naturally decide against the Russian importer on the mere basis that the Bolshevik Government is an absolute dictatorship, without freedom of action or movement, and that for that very reason labor in Russia cannot be considered free. Such an attitude on the part of the American courts would not be surprising in view of the prevailing American opinion about Russia and also because of certain known facts concerning the Russian workers. On the other hand, such an interpretation of the law should apply with equal effect to other countries that import goods to the United States. The unprejudiced American citizen may argue that if political dictatorship in Russia involves unfree or forced labor, the same should apply also to importers from other countries that are ruled by dictatorships. In fact, there are today quite a number of land[s] in Europe whose political form is a dictatorship in this or that form, some of them as absolute as the dictatorship of the Communist Party in Russia. Italy, Poland, Rumania — to mention but a few countries — all belong to the same class of political autocracy, however their forms vary. Further more, most European countries import to the United States products of their colonies. In certain of those colonies labor is not only “unfree”, but directly and positively forced, in some places even actual slavery, peonage, and other forms of forced toil. It will be seen therefore that such a law involves the greatest complications. Even with the most judicious and liberal application of such a law there must result contradictory decisions, constant friction and a wide-spread disorganization of the entire world market. Under such conditions the question would inevitably [sic] come up sooner or later as to a final and conclusive decision as to what constitutes “free” and what “unfree, forced” labor. That would indeed be a most interesting problem, but at the same time a veritable Gordian knot. Such a decision could in the last instance be decided only by the Supreme Court of the United States, which is the highest tribunal in that country, charged with interpreting the meaning of laws. On that bench, which consists of 9 persons appointed for life, there often happens to be one or two members, like the late Justice Holmes and now Brandeis, who look at things radically. And so it may happen that a Brandeis may analyze the question of “free” labor and inquire what labor can really be free under existing conditions. F…
