---
title: "For Riotous Assemblies Not Reasonable Dissent"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2019"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-for-riotous-assemblies-not-reasonable-dissent"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on August 22, 2019 from https://325.nostate.net/2010/12/16/for-riotous-assemblies-not-reasonable-dissent-uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-for-riotous-assemblies-not-reasonable-dissent.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-for-riotous-assemblies-not-reasonable-dissent.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The atmosphere of UK State repression and ‘queen’s peace’ was definitively broken on the 10 th November 2010, when the Millbank Tower, Conservative Party HQ, was stormed by a mob of malcontents, during a demonstration against student fees. The roof-top scenes of occupation and property destruction dispelled the long-held belief that the cops have the upper hand on the streets of the United Kingdom, and especially in the open-CCTV-prison of London. Something much more occurred that day than the complete trashing of the ruling political party’s headquarters in the capital city – an aching festive class violence was openly expressed and transmitted everywhere via global media, to all others in resistance around the world. Again this incredible force was experienced on 9 December, and it still only felt like the beginning. The opportunity of this moment is the opportunity for mass social rebellion. And within this is the necessity for those that consider themselves already a ‘politically conscious’ and ‘active’ class to know when to keep silent, when to step aside and to recognise that the opportunity being presented to them is to divest themselves of their own redundant, prescriptive and obstructive attachment to their own models of theory and action. Numerous ‘interactions’ (‘direct action skillshares/trainings’, ‘meetings’, calls for a centralising ‘Network’/Platform) have popped up over the past couple of weeks during the student uprisings. There is certainly value in telling people to mask up in demos, for example, or what to do when arrested, but is there really a value in ‘teaching’ rebellion, aside from the need of those teaching it to assert their own ego and present themselves as experts in struggle? In the recent riots, the crowd didn’t need to be trained or incited to attack police vehicles and occupy or destroy buildings, it occurs anywhere the people feel confident enough to resist openly en masse. The anti-capitalist ‘struggle’ in the UK has, in the last ten years, largely produced nothing worthwhile aside from myriad activist quangoes and some nice careers. If we need to fill any holes in our political identities, let’s fill them with curiosity. No sooner does authentic fury explode in the streets, then activist initiatives spring up seeking to manage it, to democratise it, to control it: the beauty of the unknown is at once crushed into the machinery of the leftist bureaucrats. Rolling out the decades failing interminable script, – action medics, people’s kitchens, workshops, email lists, ad nauseam – and calling upon the controllables – climate camp, social activist groups, federations, reformist single-issue campaigns; all the tranquilising themes – so that the social managers can attempt to make it palatable and compliant to their careerist manipulations, as frightened of the uncontrollable as the state. In the last five years, very few of the ‘conscious political’ class – the activists – have succeeded in getting out of a kettle nor finding their projects developing into one of attack. Because – as the young people and the angry know – to get out of a kettle requires a project of chaos and attack. And that is precisely what the activist cannot and will not engage in, beyond the symbolic. Why? Because the activist project is not about rebellion nor about chaos. It is primarily a project of reigning in, of taming the unruly desire to break out of all constraints, to specialise it, professionalise it and rationalise it. The activist project is the maintenance of a self-aggrandising, elitist and fictitious movement. It is a policed theatre of diversion and deference organised by social managers and leftist incompetents. It is an easily infiltrated and repressed illusion full of substitute activities for the well-meaning to waste their time with. How useful for the State to have open umbrella organisations of activism which can pressure people into certain types of conforming and exploitable democratic behaviour, a…
