---
title: "Anarchism and Elections"
author: "Gregor Kerr"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gregor-kerr-anarchism-and-elections"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This article was originally published in Red &amp; Black Revolution No. 5. Retrieved on 8th August 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "gregor-kerr-anarchism-and-elections.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/gregor-kerr-anarchism-and-elections.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Democracy??!!        Liars and Cheats?        Concessions        Put them under pressure!        Who makes the decisions??        Mandate — what mandate??        Direct Democracy        Illusions        New ideas We are all used to the scenario. You don’t see your local political ‘representatives’ for years and suddenly when an election is called they’re all swarming all over your neighbourhood like flies around cowshit — the politicians and the wannabe politicians. It’s a scene which is going to be enacted all over Ireland — both North and South — shortly as general elections loom on both sides of the border. Yet again we’ll have the great choice between Tweedledum and Tweedledumber as to who we want to sit in Leinster House or Stormont for the next four or five years — even though we know that it’s not really going to make any difference. We will of course also have the candidates who tell us they’re different — the ones who claim to be ‘honest’, ‘anti-corruption’, even ‘anti-capitalist’. The only guarantee there can be about this election — as with previous ones — is that you won’t come across any anarchists on your doorstep asking you to trust in them. Anarchists have always opposed participation in the sham of parliamentary elections and this time around it will be no different. The main reason why anarchists are so opposed to parliamentary elections is because we are fervent believers in democracy — in real democracy. What passes for democracy in terms of how parliament operates is in fact the complete opposite. You only have to look at the recent USA Presidential election for proof of that — the person who got the most votes didn’t win the election, tens of thousands of people intimidated out of voting because of the colour of their skin, ballot papers laid out so confusingly that some people didn’t know who they were voting for — and of course the result being declared before all the votes are counted. Now this didn’t take place in some backward ‘banana republic’ where they’re only starting to get the hang of this democracy thing. This was in the supposed ‘greatest democracy in the Western World’. Oh and of course almost half of the people didn’t bother to vote at all. In fact George W. Bush was elected president with the votes of less than a quarter of those entitled to vote. OK you might say, but things don’t operate like that in Ireland. We have a very fair electoral process after all. We even use Proportional Representation to ensure that the make up of the parliament reflects closely the voting intentions of the voters. Does it though? At the last general election, every single political party claimed to be opposed to Ireland entering the NATO-led so-called Partnership for Peace (PFP). We’re now members of PFP. I don’t remember any politician promising at the last election that they would ensure that the gap between rich and poor would be widened, that funds would be diverted from much-needed spending on hospitals and education in order to give tax breaks to the corporate sector. Yet this is exactly what has happened. Why is it that no matter what parties are elected to government, nothing really changes? When ‘New Labour’ replaced the Tories in Britain, did they set about repealing Thatcher’s anti-union legislation? Did they implement a new fiscal policy which would reverse some of the worst effects of Thatcherism on the working class? Not bloody likely. In fact, if we hadn’t been told we could easily have presumed that Blair was actually leading a Tory government. Likewise in Ireland (i.e. the South) over the past decade there have been 5 different parties in government (Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael, Labour, Democratic Left, Progressive Democrats). Yet the change from one government to the next has been unnoticeable — policies, economic or social, haven’t changed. Now there are two more parties waiting in the wings to get a bit of the action (Sinn Féin and the Greens) but, of course, before they will be allowed…
