---
title: "A Proletarian Critique of the Nation of Islam"
author: "Melancholic Troglodytes"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/melancholic-troglodytes-a-proletarian-critique-of-the-nation-of-islam"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Address for correspondence: Melancholic Troglodytes, c/o 56a Infoshop, 56 Crampton Street, Walworth, London SE17 3AE, United Kingdom Email: meltrogs1@hotmail.com Originally written winter 2002, London.Edited summer 2006, Lisbon. Retrieved on December 21, 2009 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "melancholic-troglodytes-a-proletarian-critique-of-the-nation-of-islam.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/melancholic-troglodytes-a-proletarian-critique-of-the-nation-of-islam.epub"
    hosted: false
---

[Read on theanarchistlibrary.org](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/melancholic-troglodytes-a-proletarian-critique-of-the-nation-of-islam)

This is a proletarian critique of the U.S. based Nation of Islam (NOI). With anything between 20,000 and 100,000 members and capable of engineering massive reactionary mobilizations, the Nation represents a significant counter-revolutionary force. The pamphlet looks at NOI’s history and evolution, the way it exploits its membership and its promotion of anti-working class, sexist, homophobic and racist ideology. Melancholic Troglodytes hope this text will encourage further analysis of NOI, religion and race from a class perspective.

With anything between 20,000 to 100,000 members, considerable financial assets and increasing political clout the Nation of Islam (NOI) represents a significant counter-revolutionary force in North American society. In many ways the Nation has only a tangential relationship to the Koran and Hadith (sayings of the prophet Mohammad), which played such a central role in the development of Islam in Arabia and conquered neighbouring countries. That a social movement, which transformed the world over a millennium ago, should be so reflected in North American life is not without its ironies. The incursions of Muslim slave traders into Africa provided the preconditions that would be subsequently exploited in the Christian trans-Atlantic slave trade. The British colonisation of North America was set out on the basis of religious mission which allowed for the enslavement of non-Christians — originally Native Americans and then also Africans.

Some scholars have argued, ‘10–30% of slaves brought from Western Africa to the Americas were Muslim, and many of them practiced their religion upon arrival’ (Steller 1996). Michael Gomez looking at figures for the entire continent writes: ‘Given that between 400,000 and 523,000 Africans came to North America during the slave trade, at least 200,000 came from areas influenced by Islam in varying degrees. Muslims have come to America by the thousands, if not the tens of thousands’ (quoted in Segal 2001: 225). There were numerous African Muslims amongst the early Spanish explorers, ‘either enslaved or hired, [working] as navigators, guides, and sailors for the Christian conquistadors’ (Gardell 1996: 32). According to Gardell (1996: 4) there were some eight million Muslims in the United States by the early 90s. Today there are more than 1,200 mosques of all sizes located throughout the Unites States (ibid.).

The vast bulk of slaves retained an indigenous African belief system. Due to Christian influence slaves were discouraged from practicing Islam and these indigenous religions. Lacking institutions by which to maintain Islam, by 1830 the majority had lost their belief in Islam (White Jr. 2001). At the same time many Christian Churches chose to retain a white identity barring ‘black’ and ‘red’ people from their congregations. Consequently, by the 1780’s a specifically black (in fact incorporating people of both African and Native American descent) church had developed, particularly in South Carolina. Some of the ministers had been part of the Black Loyalists, who responded to British promises for freedom if they fought against the North American revolutionaries. As a consequence George Liele fled Savannah following the British withdrawal and founded a black Baptist church in Jamaica. Others like David George and John Marrant went to Nova Scotia where there was a large settlement of Black Loyalists (Minges 2000). Yet others, such as the muslim Balali, ‘who managed a plantation with some five hundred slaves on the Georgia island of Sapelo’, actually ‘led eighty armed slaves in successfully defending the island against a British attack in the War of 1812’ (Segal 2001: 225).

The abolition of slavery was not so much accompanied by a relaxation of racism as by its intensification. The institution of slavery created a role for the African or their African American offspring. With the abolition of slavery (initially in New England) came a reluctance by the ‘white community’ and their institutions to allow a free ‘black community’ to flourish. Both overtly racist and more hidden racist measures were introduced to curb the free movement of black people (Melish 1998). As the legal/economic institutionalisation of slavery was removed, new restrictions based upon a hardening conception of race came to confine the activities of free blacks. Indeed free blacks were generally excluded from growing industrialisation current then.

In Nova Scotia, Canada there were in the summer of 1784 what can be described as the first race riots in Shelburne. The entire black population of Shelburne, numbering several hundred, were driven out by unemployed white Loyalist ex-soldiers. The incident, which sparked this off, was religious: the black Baptist minister, David George had baptised a white woman. However, the underlying economic reasons soon asserted themselves as the rioters went on in an attempt to lynch Benjamin Marston, the chief surveyor who they held responsible for delays in granting them land. Here the pogrom of Black Loyalists, many of whom competed for work with the White Loyalists, accompanied an assault on the authorities whose delays in handing out land affected ex-soldiers both black and white. From the account of white people being baptised in a black church, the pogrom underlines how the rioters’ goal of ensuring land settlement was accompanied by a desire to reassert a distinction between themselves as whites and the impoverished Black Loyalists1.

In the same period there was in 1786 what appears to be the first anti-racist demonstration when London’s black population protested proposals to introduce laws to expel black people from England, copying what had already been done in France. The resistance to these attacks on free black ‘communities’ was accompanied by the growth of Christian sentiment in these communities. As in England the acquisition of Christianity was accompanied by the acquisition of literacy. Trevelyan has illustrated how the geographic spread of the Peasant’s Revolt paralleled the spread of Lollardry in the fourteenth century (Trevelyan 1908).

The successful conclusion of the war swiftly led to the abolition of slavery in North America and was followed by an intense struggle in the conquered South as former slaves asserted themselves socially, politically and economically and plantation owners tried to ensure that the land they owned retained its social quality as capital by subordinating black labour to work it for them. The US Army by asserting their rights of ownership prevented the former slaves from taking over the land. This was a period when former slaves, many of whom had been manual workers, occupied political positions in a way only elsewhere realised in the Paris Commune. Nevertheless the old Slave-owning elite organised the Ku Klux Klan, established in Pulaski, Tennessee, in 1866. Most of its leaders were former members of the Confederate Army. Any attempt to form ‘black protection groups such as trade unions was quickly dealt with’ (Teaching History Online). Offering less wealthy whites, ‘racial supremacy’, with all its real and imagined benefits it served to restrict the social opportunities to the newly freed slaves who were forced back to the plantations under disadvantageous conditions.

It was precisely this erasure of a black middle class, which fuelled Booker T. Washington’s approach to racial uplift. Rather than just creating a middle class to be repeatedly stomped into the ground, Washington lowered his sights in the hope of achieving some tangible goals. Faced with terror, he became quiescent focussing on developing technical skills that would allow some slight opportunities for former slaves and their children to become skilled workers. It has been suggested that he was, in fact, purveyor of more radical politics, which he hid from his rich white benefactors for fear of losing their support. This certainly explains his writing style and media representational techniques. Carla Willard (2001: 629) suggests:

... narrative brevity helped him skirt the inflammatory phrase ... his stories also fascinated like advertisements. Admiring audiences flocked to his stories from so many disparate ideological positions that it is hard to believe that they read from the same script ... [Washington’s] anecdotal style increased the attractiveness and saleability of his stories, and through his stories, the exposure and funding of his entire project of black uplift.

In other words ‘Washington spoke less3 not only to leap over troubled social terrain but also to engage further the disparate social and political positions of his readers’ (Willard 2001: 632).

However, in 1915 the Ku Klux Klan was reformed by William J. Simmons, ‘a preacher influenced by Thomas Dixon’s book, The Ku Klux Klan (1905) and the film of the book, Birth of a Nation directed by D.W. Griffith’ (Ibid.). The oppression became so fierce that even someone as pliant as Booker T. Washington felt obliged to intervene with more urgency. He began in late life to speak out ‘in surprisingly direct terms against Jim Crow, lynching, and D.W. Griffith’s sordidly successful film of 1915, The Birth of a Nation’ (Willard 2001: 632). By 1925 Ku Klux Klan membership reached a staggering 4,000,000. According to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), ‘between 1900 to 1930 ... blacks were lynched on an average of every other day’ (White Jr. 2001: 15). In addition the KKK acted as strike breakers. Jim Crow laws were widespread and the ‘black servicemen who returned to America after World War I found that they frequently had been treated better in European countries than they were in their own home’ (Gudel and Duckworth 1986).

Although the Great Migration of Southern blacks to northern cities like Chicago, New York and Detroit led to slight economic improvement, this trend reversed itself ‘after [World war I], and frustration, anxiety and discontent arose’ (Religious Movements website 2000).

In this period we see the experience of Wilmington 1898 repeated in Tulsa in 1921. James R. Allen (2001) describes how ‘about 1200 buildings, including 23 churches, [were] burned, bombed, or looted, and as many as 300 people [were] shot, burned alive, or dragged behind cars.’ The Tulsa police actually deputized members of the Ku Klux Klan to carry out the punishments. Allen suggests, ‘[The Ku Klux Klan] became strong after the collapse of the Oklahoma Socialist Party. Previously the strongest group in the area.’ Whereas the 1917 Race Riots in East St Louis had been a pogrom leading to the death of over 300 following the use of black strike breakers, the Chicago race riot arose due to a dispute over black-white neighbourhood boundaries. However the climax of the Tulsa Pogrom was the sacking of what was regarded as the ‘black Wall Street’. As I. Marc Carlson has indicated this riot went beyond an armed brawl to become a veritable ‘organized urban warfare.’ Around 1913 and within this context of institutionalised racism, the deradicalization of the black church, proletarian mobility and intense capitalist development we find the first recorded ‘assertive Muslim presence’ (Segal 2001: 225).

If Washington D.C. can be called its diplomatic capital and New York its financial nerve centre, then the Nation of Islam’s power-base is located in Chicago. The ‘Windy City’ was, after all, founded by Jean Baptiste Point du Sable, a black man who came to the Mississippi Valley with French explorers and constructed the first building on the site that developed into Chicago. The Chicago of the 1920s was in many ways a perfect breeding ground for reactionary movements. Gareth Canaan (2001: 148) notes:

for Chicago’s black workers, the economic and living conditions were already in decline during the 1920s...as severe as the Great Depression was, it only further exacerbated pre-existing conditions within the black community ... African American women in Chicago enjoyed increased job opportunities between 1910 and 1920 but, unlike black women in other northern cities, were largely shut out of industry ... [However] as wartime production in industry contracted, African-American workers were fired and replaced by whites who had returned from the war and needed employment.

The depiction of the 1920s Chicago as a booming and prosperous city is, therefore, highly exaggerated. Again according to Canaan (2001: 164) ‘an estimated 34.5 to 50.1 per cent of urban families lived under the poverty line...the unemployment rate of industrial workers [averaged] 12.95 per cent between 1921 and 1926.’

Davies (1988: 20) has convincingly argued that the rapid industrialization of cities such as Chicago in the nineteenth century tended to fragment rather than unify the proletariat (unlike industrialization in Western Europe). He cites three centrifugal forces acting to pull the American working class apart. First, in these areas industrialization arose,

without those deep roots in the artisanal resistance to industrialism which many historians have stressed as a determining factor in the formation of militant unionism and working class consciousness...it was this expanding urban-industrial frontier...with its constantly replenished opportunities for small-scale entrepreneurial accumulation, that provided material sustenance for the petty-bourgeois ideologies of individual mobility that gripped the minds of so many American workers (Davies 1988: 20).

The second centrifugal influence was the Yankee vs. immigrant conflict that emerged after the ‘arrival of several million impoverished Irish and German laborers who came in a flood (sic) after the European crop failures of the 1840s’ (ibid. p 21).

To this was added cultural difference and religious tensions that American society cemented, making proletarian unity more untenable. Finally, there was the problem of racism and slavery. ‘As Tocqueville observed’, writes Davies about the 1850s,

the antebellum North was, if anything, more poisonously anti-Black than the South... Although segments of the native white working class, especially in New England, eventually embraced Abolitionism, they remained a minority whose opposition to slavery was most often framed within a pietistic religious ideology, rather than within a clear political analysis of the relationship between capitalism and slavery (ibid).

After the Draft Riot of 1863, which began as a struggle against the ‘silk-stocking rich’ and ended up as an anti-black pogrom, even the Irish proletariat severed their links with the despised black proletariat.

It is true that World War II provided some black proletarians entrance to hitherto inaccessible areas of the manufacturing sector. In fact, ‘the shortage of labor led to the uneven integration of Afro-Americans into more skilled positions; but, at war’s end, most still held unskilled positions’ (Robinson 2001: 36). Many more languished in jails or remained unemployed.

The Nation’s more recent ideological origins should be traced to a number of early twentieth century influences. Shortly before World War I, two black movements were founded: the ‘Moorish Science Temple of America’ established in 1913 by Timothy Drew and the ‘Universal Negro Improvement Association’ founded in 1914 by Marcus Garvey. Freemasonry, Gnosticism, and the Islamic creeds of Ismailiyya, Ahmadiyya and Sufism influenced the Moors. Members were ‘advised to respect the inequalities of social stratification’ (Gardell 1966: 44). Garvey was a printer by trade, who had led an unsuccessful strike in his youth at Kingston. The experience of defeat ‘imbued him with a lifelong scepticism regarding unionism and class struggle’ (Gardell 1996: 23). He also believed, ‘potentially, every whiteman is a Klansman, as far as the Negro in competition with whites socially, economically and politically is concerned, and there is no use lying about it’ (Gardell 1996: 272). As E. Franklin Frazier has explained:

Garvey not only promised the despised Negro a paradise on earth, but he made the Negro an important person in his immediate environment. He invented honors and social distinctions and converted every social invention to his use in his effort to make his followers important. While everyone was not a ‘knight or sir’, all his followers were fellow-men of the Negro race ... The women were organized into black Cross Nurses and the men became uniformed members of the vanguard of the great African army (Quoted in Marable 1998: 167).

Garvey’s metaphysical belief ‘in a pure black race just as [...] all self-respecting whites believe in a pure white race’ will be picked up by the NOI eventually (Gardell 1996: 272).

The man who blended Noble Drew Ali and Marcus Garvey with a smattering of Islam was a door-to-door rug salesman and convicted drug dealer called Wallace Dodd Ford. By this stage in the 1930s, the memory of Islam may have been alive amongst children of early slaves but ‘we encounter [mostly] a memory, not a living faith’ (Gardell 1996: 35). Palmer takes up the story:

Upon Ford’s 1929 release from California’s San Quintin Prison, he moved to Detroit to start a new life. Ford used a number of names, including Wali Farad and Master Fard and claimed to be from Mecca, Arabia. Being that Ford’s parentage was a mixture of white and South pacific Maori, he used his skin color and his prison con skills to pass himself off to blacks as a ‘mystic’ and a ‘prophet’ from the Middle East...Among his first students was an unemployed Georgia migrant worker, Elijah Poole, who Ford renamed ‘Elijah Muhammad’. In later years, Ford disappeared and Elijah assumed leadership of the NOI which he held until his death in 1975.

Ford (or Noble Drew Ali as he was known to the faithful) disappeared in mysterious circumstances. Some allege he was murdered by the family of a young girl whom he had raped, whilst others maintain he was the victim of foul play by the federal state. Elijah Muhammad’s ‘explanation’ for his master’s disappearance was simpler: ‘We believe that Allah (God) appeared in the person of Master W. Fard Muhammad, July, 1930 — the long awaited ‘Messiah’ of the Christians and the ‘Mahdi’ of the Muslims’ (Elijah Muhammad 1965). He has ascended back into heaven but, lest the faithful grow anxious, it was alleged that he would return at Armageddon to proclaim the total victory of the black man over the white man. Elijah Muhammad was not very popular with certain sections of the Nation. His life was threatened by rivals from Temple No. 2 in Chicago, causing him to fled to Milwaukee in 1935 (Bush: 1999: 142). He returned in 1942 to assume leadership of the national office in Chicago. His imprisonment for refusing to be drafted, ‘imparted to Elijah Muhammad a sense of martyrdom, which reinforced his claim of leadership. He returned to Chicago in 1946, after his release from prison as undisputed leader of the nation of Islam’ (Bush 1999: 143).

The essential element in a critique of the Nation of Islam is to grasp its adherents as Pendulum-junkies. Its founding fathers discovered and at times invented ideological bi-polarities around which the strategy of the movement could be organized. Like Gestalt psychologists configuration and presentation is privileged over substance. This then creates the illusion of motion with which the rank-and-file are mesmerized.

The repetitive toing-and-froing of the pendulum serves to imbue the flock with a crass activism, suppressing doubt by promoting dynamic disorientation. At first it proves to be an indispensable party-building device, but the pendulum has a nasty side effect. Once it reaches critical mass, it acquires a mind of its own, disowning the Prime Mover and transforming whoever strays in its path into dependent junkies. The fact that Farrakhan has managed to exert his power over violent faction fighting and contending interest groups within the Nation is testimony to his personnel management skills. For example, whenever he was scheduled to speak ‘all Muslims from a five-hundred-mile radius were instructed to be there for security’, but in reality ‘[they were encouraged to attend] as an audience against a poor showing’ (White Jr. 2001) and whenever a minister became too popular with members, an excuse was found to demote him.

When people focus on the white media’s obsession with Louis Farrakhan, they think the media hate Farrakhan so much. But they don’t hate him. They love him. One of the reason’s why they love him is that he’s totally pro-capitalist. There is a tremendous overlap in the values of a Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam and the values of the white, Christian right (bell hooks interviewed in Z Magazine ).

In March 1990 Farrakhan appeared on ‘The Phil Donahue show’ and after the Million Man March, he was invited on ‘Larry King Live’ (see Robinson 2001: 123). The March itself was covered by CNN in its entirety. Gardell (1996: 140) reports, ‘as of September 1995, Minister Farrakhan could be heard on forty-eight different radio stations and seen on at least ninety-nine different television channels across the United States.’ The Nation is now an official part of the establishment. That is the reason George W. Bush in 2000, while he was still the Texas governor decided, ‘under his charitable choice plan, the Nation of Islam would be able to provide various social services using tax dollars’ (PR Newswire, Feb 1, 2000). This was part of Bush’s overall plan to cut welfare payment and turn faith-based organizations into primary providers of social services. Music to the ears of Farrakhan who has been lecturing about ‘self-improvement’ and ‘economic independence’ for years, in much the same way various Muslim organizations establish a welfare network around the mosque in order to strengthen their political status.

In 1991 NOI launched the Three Year Economic Savings Plan, in order to catalyse the process of capital accumulation. Members were asked to donate $10 a month. ‘Farrakhan suggests’, writes Gardell (1996: 32), ‘that the government should support the Three Year plan by allowing blacks to direct 15 percent of their taxes to the NOI savings program.’

Asabiyya, Ibn Khaldun contended cryptically, ‘is a function of lineage affiliation or something that fulfils the role of such affiliation’ — a kind of group solidarity maintained by a dominant element with a mandate to coerce. It could be viewed as a socio-economic structure based on vassal relations marking the transition from an egalitarian tribal system to class society.

The Nation of Islam’s early phase of development (circa 1930–1960) was characterized by the search for asabiyya through a nation-building program in what was often a hostile climate. The crash of 1929 had hit black capital just as severely as the larger white capital it depended on. In this context religious values were only of secondary importance to the extent that they fostered and strengthened asabiyya. Black Muslim leaders consistently called for a separate state, either on US soil or elsewhere, despite realizing that there was no realistic chance of being granted one. There was, for instance, the project advocated by the National Movement for the Establishment of the Forty-Ninth State. This group of black nationalists ‘argued that because they did not receive the promised forty acres and a mule in the nineteenth century, they should now receive a separate state from the government’ (White Jr. 2001). This was an opening salvo in a protracted negotiation over compensation for slavery that is still raging today. Apart from its obvious monetary benefits, the quest acts as Holy Grail and an emblematic desire for independence from the white Devil. It is claimed that Fard successfully recruited 8,000 followers into his Lost-Found Nation of Islam between 1930 to 1934 alone.

In The Theology of Time , a work which by contrast makes Hitler’s Mein Kampf and Khomeini’s Secrets Revealed appear monumentally coherent, the Honourable space-cadet Elijah Muhammad uses a combination of messianic, chiliastic and numerological myths to forge a new historical identity for black Americans. The prophet Muhammad (the real one!) is dismissively referred to as ‘white’ (!); the black Stone of Kaa’ba as proof that people will one day bow to the real black Man, Elijah; a 30 million black army deemed sufficient to help the chosen one ‘rule the whole world’; Africans are blessed as special and chastised as uncivilized in the same paragraph; the ‘mad scientist’, Yakub4 (contradictorily referred to as ‘a devil’ and ‘another god’) is alleged to have grafted devils (the white race) from the black Man 6,600 years ago (!); in a direct reversal of white racism, Elijah Muhammad refers to an even younger group called ‘the monkey family, who were created from white people as they tried to graft themselves back to the black nation. A few got as far as what you call a gorilla’ (Elijah Muhammad 1965); the black people have a more ancient origin, in fact they are ‘66 trillion years from the moon’!

The honourable one assures us that women are not all fools and their function viewed as comforters of men, although ‘[men] have more powerful brains than she because we were made to rule’ (ibid.); Islam is perceived as black Man’s equivalent of white masonry (‘masons who have reached siren degrees as 32 nd or 33 rd are called Moslem Shriners); the ‘Hindu’ (sic) Vietnamese and Christian Americans fighting each other condemned as equally godless and condemned to physical annihilation (‘I wish that My God would allow me to get one of these nuclear bombs and one of these planes... I would show you how long they would be here...’); following Nobel Drew Ali and preceding Khomeini by decades, America is referred to as the ‘Great Satan’; and onwards and upwards into a crescendo of bird-brained absurdity.

This absurd ideology served to augment the spatial exclusivity of Muslim temples by providing the membership with, appropriate psychological armour in their daily struggle against American alienation. The Nation’s party builders had a great deal of material to work with, after all the Christian church was probably the most segregated institution in the country. One common recruitment technique during the heyday of the civil rights movement was ‘to use clippings from newspapers showing blacks being turned away from white churches or of white Christian ministers openly advocating segregation’ (Gudel & Duckworth, ibid.).

This alienation was actively encouraged by the white judiciary at least since 1898 when in a landmark ruling the railroad companies were given the go ahead to segregate their workforce along racial lines. This institutionalised racism allowed up and coming bourgeois blacks to set up enclosures within which primitive accumulation of (black) capital could shield itself from unwelcome competition. Once the Nation’s religious credentials were constitutionally verified, their temples and schools could become tax-exempt. In addition, each member is obliged to give a tenth of his earnings to the temple, although White Jr. (2001: 59) claims as much as a third of members’ salaries go to the Nation.

Where the Moorish Science Temple were content to play home-spun economics, indulging in the simple commodity production of heating oil, bath compounds, minerals, and tonics, the Nation laid the foundation of more ambitious schemes, setting up restaurants, bazaars, farms, bakeries, clothes stores, theatres, rallies and a regular newspaper network. According to Robinson (2001: 40) the Nation ‘even purchased a bank.’ And while the former appropriated a Moorish identity as a legal method of resisting slavery, the latter (temporarily) spurned full US citizenship.5

The early 60s heralded a Rubicon. By this time enough asabiyya had been stored in the organization’s battery cells to last it a lifetime. This primitive accumulation of capital was achieved through the ‘super-exploitation’ of black workers. Robinson (2001: 42) reports how many members who worked ‘long hours in the restaurants and bakeries didn’t get paid for all the time they worked.’ Moreover, ‘with the religious ban on wastefulness and extravagant pleasures, investment of accumulated capital was regularized and modern ‘rational’ capitalism became a reality’ (Gardell 1996: 115). However, the nation’s isolationism was proving counter-productive and capital accumulation slowing down. Individuals like Malcolm X were beginning to find the constraints of fake humility and political non-intervention unbearable, and the American left’s influence in Harlem was waning. At his behest, and despite Elijah Muhammad’s initial objections the nation co-operated with a sympathetic producer who made an hour long documentary called The Hate That hate produced about the organization. Membership doubled from an estimated base 40,000 (according to C. Eric Lincoln) as a result of the broadcast. The influx of university-educated blacks soon began demanding change and modernization. The switch from asabiyya to umma (the false universal Islamic community) was inaugurated through a number of highly publicized politico-spiritual pilgrimages.

In the same way that the asabiyya/umma dichotomy can only be fully understood within the wider context of the periodical American oscillation between isolationism and expansionism, the romanticized spiritual journey of Muslim leaders requires a larger historical canvass.

‘Islam is permeated with nostalgia for departure’, writes an American scholar (P. L. Wilson). This is true so long as one does not lose touch with the material source of this nostalgia: the Bedouin who fought enclosures and resisted Islamic urbanization; the annual de-paganization of Mecca/Medina (Hajj) as a platform for kick-starting the mercantile economy; the long voyages abroad in search of booty and imperial conquest; the Sufi wandering away from the epicentres of Islamic corruption; and, finally pilgrimage to exotic lands as a tactic of legitimising one’s authority within a sect and against political rivals. All these earthly methods of accumulating wealth and power represent the real basis of the idealistic notion of ‘nostalgia’ in Islamic literature.

When Ibn Battuta, the famous 14 th century Muslim traveller, embarked on his voyage of discovery, he used the caravanserai route to cut across invisible borders and the magical Khanegah (Sufi hospice) route to transcend real obstacles.

In imitation the NOI spreads its matrix of mosques across America like so many plastic squats on a monopoly board. Yet the simulated network reminds one more of interlocking chains of McDonald’s and YMCAS, catering to the alienated and confused with a menu of spiritual fast food and squeaky beds. At its height, ‘the Nation owned farms in three estates, a newspaper that earned annual profits of $3 million, a Chicago supermarket that cleared $325,000 on sales of $1.7 million, a string of small bakeries and cleaners, over 40 Chicago-area rental properties and the controlling interest in the Guaranty Bank and Trust Co. on the South Side’ (Steller 1996). During Elijah Muhammad’s last Savior’s Day convention in 1974, the Nation claimed to have amassed $75 million and that its corporate empire included ‘a trucking firm, farms, restaurants, newspapers, grocery stores, apartment buildings, a fish enterprise, and a fleet of airplanes’ (White Jr. 2001: 97).

Since 1982 Farrakhan has coerced members to part with millions of dollars for building a National Centre Complex, school and adult education facility- projects that were never fulfilled. Robinson (2001: 41) underscores the importance to the Nation of separate education: ‘By 1974 forty-six cities in the United States had NOI elementary schools. These schools taught fundamentals and doctrine. Boys and girls attended separate classes, if space permitted.’ Ironically, the Nation has always been in dire financial difficulties through a mixture of mismanagement and corruption. For instance, it is often very hard to locate temples because they must constantly change address due to evictions for unpaid bills.

Taking another leaf out of Sufi techniques of pedagogy, the Fruits of Islam are put through an arduous and painful initiation ceremony. They are instructed to do things that often seem bizarre and illogical. For instance, one ex-member had to post bulletins in wind-chill temperatures of minus 45 degrees (White Jr. 2001: 73). Giving financial support to the coffers of the Nation could easily translate into personal bankruptcy. The goal is to break the spirit of members and remould them in the Nation’s image as Sufi initiates have been remoulded for eons by their pirs.

Every successful pilgrimage to ‘the holy lands’ (to be understood in the broadest geo-cultural sense) shifts the balance of power within the organization. His 1985 trip to Libya was rewarded with a $5 million donation from Colonel Qadhafi, which was wasted on a failed venture called POWER (People Organized Working for Economic Rebirth). The promised employment opportunities never materialized and the Clean-n-Fresh beauty products on sale were twice as expensive as rival commodities. Farrakhan’s latest tour of the Middle East and Africa undermined his American rivals and promoted the financial conditions for the next phase of capital accumulation. Although he denies being a prophet, he certainly knows how to act as one. The World Friendship Tour of Minister Louis Farrakhan (1996) saw him visit a number of key countries in the Middle East and Africa. Everywhere he had accolades heaped upon him by corrupt politicians whilst his simple-minded rhetoric was completely ignored by a proletariat too savvy to fall for what passes for political discourse in the States. In Syria he was praised by president Hafez al-Asad for his piety and virtue (sic). The Grand Mufti of Syria offered a cultural treaty, including hundreds of scholarships for young men and women from the U.S. at the Islamic Call Society Academy in Damascus (Askia Muhammad 1997).

In Iran, Farrakhan went through the ritual of laying a wreath at the tomb of the fascist Khomeini with the following panegyrics: ‘Allah sent us Imam Khomeini to guide and lead the Iranian people on the straight path. Iran is now the vanguard of the Islamic revolution sweeping the earth’ (ibid.). After a chat with Saddam Hussein and Necmettin Erbakan (the Turkish leader of what used to be called the ‘Welfare Party’), Farrakhan’s declarations became even more outlandish. In Malaysia he seemed to have completely lost the plot: ‘America says she’s the only superpower left...but she better look again. Islam is the next world superpower, and you will be the leaders of that world’.

The disciplining of Muslim proletarians employed by the Nation’s temples (employment guilds combining the functions of civil and political societies) through starvation wages was ideal preparation for extending trade. This disciplining sometimes takes the form of a spectacle, which has been described as a ‘mixture of Baptist revival tent service and a criminal hearing’ (White Jr., 2001: 86). The end result is to have a trouble free workforce who ‘works for no one but Allah’. One member of the Nation has had the decency to call this set up by its proper name: ‘we became the black Mafia!’ (Quoted in white Jr., ibid., p 146).

The capital can be accumulated unhindered through Japanese fish trawlers importing South American fish or thousands of sheep and cattle shifted across the country using a regiment of trucks and planes.6 This bosses’ paradise is only occasionally threatened with workers’ revolt. When the Nation established its Blue Seas Whiting Fish Company, ‘members were expected to buy thousands of pounds yearly’ in order to keep it profitable. However, ‘eventually members refused to buy the fish. Because of this policy, Blue Seas failed as a money enterprise. In 1991 the company filed for bankruptcy’ (Whit Jr.: 2001: 92).

Throughout Ibn Battuta’s journey doors would open and obstacles cleared from his path almost as if an angel had taken permanent residence on his shoulder. The trick, of course, was to be a Sufi initiate and know all the passwords. American black leaders have always been wise to this. Noble Drew Ali, founder of the Moorish Science Temple, was a mason, as was Elijah Muhammad. In 1775 ‘fifteen Negroes were initiated into a British lodge of freemasons, at Boston. After the Revolution, the white American masons refused their Negro brothers to set up a lodge, but the Negroes applied directly to the Grand lodge of England and were immediately granted a charter’.7

Such attitudes fuelled separatist tendencies and strengthened the Nation’s perception of the whole of America as jahaliyeh (here land of ignorance). Consequently, unlike Martin Luther King and the NAACP, the Nation organized in the North and won many converts. The uneven spread of bigotry facing blacks required a flexible stratagem, hence a new double-headed monster was concocted: racism and racialism. The pendulum began swinging once more.

I once debated with Malcolm X on TV in Los Angeles... As we were leaving the studio, we were greeted by several white (sic) students, Moslems from Persia, who complained to Malcolm that they had attempted to visit Elijah Muhammad’s temples and were refused entry because they were white-eyed devils. Malcolm glossed the matter over: ‘Let’s look at it this way,’ he told the Persians, ‘if a lion is in a cage, his roar will be different from the roar of the lion who is in the forest. That’s why you couldn’t get in our temples. But both the lion in the forest and the lion in the cage are lions. That is what matters. Lions love lions: they hate leopards.

Drew Ali was a lax racialist, believing in the separate development and destiny of black people whilst permitting asians (Amerindians, Chinese, Japanese, and even white Celts and Persians) to join the Moorish Science Temple. Elijah Muhammad, as already indicated, a strict racist espoused the superiority of blacks over all others. Malcolm X who in his conformist phase swung both ways, slowly evolved towards a more tolerant position, splitting with his mentor. Uncle Louis, perhaps the most opportunistic of the Nation’s leaders, remains an unreconstituted racist who actively encourages political alliance with other minorities so long as his position as supreme boss is not threatened. Segal believes that while all previous leaders of the NOI were prejudiced, to some extent, ‘it was under the leadership of Farrakhan...that the Nation of Islam took to demonising the Jews with invective fervor. Jews were accused of having injected black babies with he AIDS virus...’ (Segal 2001: 235).

Gardell (1996: 246–252) has demonstrated some of the complexities in US Black-Jewish relations over the years:

The first Jews to arrive in the New World in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries adhered to a conservative line of thinking and kept a low or apolitical profile...Starting in the 1880s, this pattern began to change with the influx of working class socialist Jews from Russia and eastern Europe.

Throughout the first half of the 20 th century ‘Jews were there to form a coalition with blacks in a fight for common causes’ (Gardell 1996: 247). Since the NOI does not encourage a class analysis it is easy to ignore the plight of Jewish proletarians and to highlight those Jewish-Americans who stand in an exploitative relationship vis-à-vis black proletarians. We are talking about slumlords, ghetto store-owners, etc., who are at times the only exploiters that ghettoised blacks come into direct contact with. Reactionary Black and Jewish racists have been successful in driving a wedge between these two potentially radical sections of the US proletariat.

For instance, when a black reporter, Milton Coleman, reported Jesse Jackson’s anti-Semite jibe about ‘hymie-town’ (New York)8, he was branded as an Uncle Tom and race traitor by Farrakhan who urged the black community to ostracize him:

What do we do with Coleman? At this point, no physical harm. But for now, I’m going to get every church in Washington, D.C., to put him out ... One day soon, we will punish you with death. You say when is that? In sufficient time, we will come to power right inside this country ... This is a fitting punishment for dogs (quoted in White Jr., ibid, p 103).

This harked back to some of his inflammatory remarks against Malcolm X: ‘Only those who wish to be led to hell or to their doom will follow Malcolm. The die is set, and Malcolm shall not escape ... such a man as Malcolm is worthy of death...’ (Muhammad Speaks, 10 November 1964).9

Farrakhan then went on to call Hitler ‘a great leader’, call Judaism a ‘dirty’ religion, publish the racist forgery Protocols of the Elders of Zion and ultimately to challenge the authenticity of the Holocaust. Today the Final Call newspaper carries similar denial claims regarding Saddam Hussein’s gassing of the Kurds.

Another notorious book The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews was written by the Nation’s own ‘scholars’. Using selective texts it blames,

conversos as the driving force behind New World Exploitation, and, by extrapolation, slavery. In its simplistic overview, anybody who had anything to do with Atlantic maritime commerce or New World colonization was either a Jew or a conversos (Leinweber 2001).

The book fails to point out the racism that drove so many Jews to engage in usury or commerce or the inconvenient fact that during the Medieval Era, Jews themselves were often captured and sold into slavery. By sleight of hand, terms such as ‘Dutch’ and ‘Jewish’ become veritable synonyms, so that the establishment of the Great Bank of Amsterdam in 1609 can be perceived as part of a Jewish bid for world domination. Some prestigious Afro-American scholars such as Tony Martin and Professor Leonard Jeffries jumped on Farrakhan’s racist bandwagon. According to Segal (2001: 238) the ‘Jewish involvement in the Islamic black slave trade was relatively minor as well as intermittent’. And Henry Louis Gates Jr., head of the African-American Studies department at Harvard University, has concluded: ‘American Jewish merchants accounted for less than two per cent of all the African slaves traders imported into the New World...all the Jewish slave traders combined bought and sold fewer slaves than the single gentile firm of Franklin and Armfield’ (quoted in Segal, ibid.).

In 1993, Khallid Muhammad, Farrakhan’s alleged flame-thrower went even further during a speech at Kean College, New Jersey:

Everybody always talks about Hitler exterminating six million Jews...But doesn’t anybody ever ask what they did to Hitler? They went there, in Germany, the way they do everywhere they go, and they supplanted, they usurped, they turned around Germany and a German, in his own country, would have to go to a Jew to get money.

Then with reference to South Africa, borrowing language from a western, he continued:

... we give him [whites] 24 hours to get out of town by sundown...if he won’t ... we kill everything white that ain’t right in South Africa. We kill the women, we kill the children. We kill the babies. We kill the blind, we kill the crippled, we kill’em all. We kill the faggot, we kill the lesbian, we’ll kill them all ... Why kill the babies? ... Because they gonna grow up one day to oppress our babies ... Why kill the women? ... Because they are the military or the army’s manufacturing center. They lay on their back and reinforcement roll out between their legs (quoted in White Jr., ibid., p 120).

Such unrestrained bigotry throughout the history of the Nation has manipulated politically naïve blacks to wage holy wars against all whites irrespective of their class affiliations. One such case was the infamous ‘Zebra Killings’ in San Francisco during late 1973 and early 1974. According to White Jr. (2001: 28) the four murderers claimed to be following the teachings of the Lost Found Nation of Islam. Calling themselves the Death Angeles they managed to decapitate fifteen victims and permanently injure many more before capture. The court proceedings exposed that the local minister of Islam had hired attorneys for the convicted men. When a serial killer called Wayne Williams murdered twenty-six black babies in Atlanta, Georgia, Farrakhan’s responded with predictable bravado: ‘You better start finding the killer of our babies or some of your white babies will begin to die’.

Today Farrakhan does not display the honest naiveté of his youth quite so cavalierly. But there was a time when he was less coy. At a rally for Angela Davis, he asserted:

Black supremacy was supposed to be something evil. Supremacy means to be top, to be the Supreme Ruler. Somebody has to be supreme, white folks. You’ve been supreme for 6000 years. What’s wrong with black supremacy? It’s our day now! And some foolish brother will say, ‘Black supremacy is just as bad as white supremacy’. How would you know? You never lived under black Rule.

In April 1994 in another typical remark he warns: ‘I am going to be like a pit bull. That is the way I’m going to be against the Jews. I am going to bite the tail of the honkies’.

Jason Glenn (1996) has correctly pointed out that Farrakhan, despite his rhetoric and dalliance with Middle Eastern/African identity politics is a decidedly Western phenomenon:

Why is America unable and unwilling to deal with Farrakhan? Because he thinks exactly as America does. America is unable to deal with Farrakhan because he is an orthodox Western thinker. To deal with Farrakhan, America would have to deal with itself.

If our thesis that the nation of Islam combines four related tendencies, namely black Nationalism, religious beliefs, cult-worship and gang activity is correct, then the success of the Nation should be seen in the context of similar North American movements.10

What unites the Nation’s conception of race with white racists is pseudo-scientific biological determinism that only occasionally requires the support of its lesser twin, cultural determinism. This was a crucial element in a host of half-baked ideas thrown haphazardly into the Nation’s ideological melting pot. Robinson (2001: 35) has shown how, ‘in terms of ideas and practice, Muhammad mixed Horatio Alger themes of uplift, racial determinism, and gender subordination, with an apolitical millenarianism.’ Farrakhan’s bigotry against homosexuals seems a confused mixture of both forms of determinism:

... I think that when you warehouse black men in prisons and they have a sexual drive that is being titillated by the lyrics and by the cultural degeneracy that pervades America today, this sexual need is sometimes filled with activity that God disapproved of (Meet the press interview, 10/12/1970).
