---
title: "A call for an Anarchist Conference"
author: "Anarchist Federation, Fifth of May Group"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fifth-of-may-group-a-call-for-an-anarchist-conference"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Organise! Issue 45 — Spring 1997. Retrieved on May 13, 2013 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "fifth-of-may-group-a-call-for-an-anarchist-conference.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fifth-of-may-group-a-call-for-an-anarchist-conference.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Dear Organise!        Reply We, Turkish and Kurdish anarchists who live in Britain, first would like to express very briefly some of the weaknesses such as lack of co-ordination, communication and solidarity that we see in the British anarchist movement which either we are part of or trying to take part in. Then we will put forward our suggestions and opinions, again very briefly. We think that the British anarchist movement is at the moment in a situation in which it is disorganised and atomised, and it has no aims nation-wide. And except the Anarchist Bookfair which is organised every year and gradually becoming monotonous, we do not see each other, we do not communally inform each other, let alone directing our forces toward mutual aims. We know that there are some friends out there who try to do this. However, we also know that this is not enough. Everything goes on by itself. We are lost in the labyrinths the capitalist system has consciously and purposely created. British anarchists have come near the point at which they exist without sufficient communication and willpower, while they continually oppose the extreme centralism of Marxists. We all know that the elections are coming. Is it not necessary for British anarchists to agree upon a policy in order to act nation-wide against such a nation-wide event? But we do nothing. We seem to be quite comfortable in our little caves. The lack of communication and solidarity among the anarchists affect most of us, that is, anarchists who come from other parts of the world. Although we try hard to become involved as much as we can in the anarchist movement, we have not been too successful integrating into it. We already experience among our own society, which is under the hegemony of Marxism and liberalism, the inevitable alienation. What a bitter experience this is! “Exile life is as grey as English weather”. Anyway... It is not our intention here to moan but to persuade you our comrades. We invite all groups, organisations, initiatives, etc. in the movement to organise an anarchist conference to discuss thoroughly what has been said in this letter as well as other points which we could not mention here in order to arrive at certain conclusions, most importantly, to create an information centre, and even organise and form an anarchist confederation which would be composed of local as well as national anarchist groups and organisations, and which would be dependent upon such organisations’ self-control and absolute autonomy. The call is from ours, to organise this would be your task. Because we know well that considering our own lack of communication we are not suitable for the job. The first three groups, organisations or individuals who would reply to this letter positively will organise the first preparatory committee of the conference. Our task is to get these three groups, organisations or individuals to meet each other. With other groups, organisations or individuals, this committee can later be expanded by the very people who have first started the initiative. We would like you all to discuss this and other things we have mentioned in this letter and send all your replies to the address below. In solidarity, 5 th May Group (This reply is printed in issue 46, but is included here to go with the letter) Dear 5 th May Group, We have discussed your proposal which we have also printed in the latest issue of Organise! and we have decided to support your call for a conference. However, we did decide that it would be better if the conference was separate from the (London) Anarchist Bookfair, as it is all too easy for just any one to turn up (i.e. someone who is just interested in the books, or in drinking...), without any committment to the aims of such a conference. This would also go for the day after the Bookfair, as we will be having an ACF meeting then. In any case, you may find the Bookfair date is too soon and there is not time for a long meeting as there are always …
