---
title: "Egypt’s Black Bloc"
author: "Oz Katerji"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/oz-katerji-egypt-s-black-bloc"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-03-08 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "oz-katerji-egypt-s-black-bloc.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/oz-katerji-egypt-s-black-bloc.epub"
    hosted: false
---

When the term “Black Bloc” is used in the Western media there tends to be a lot of bullshit banded about. The right-wing press consider them good-for-nothing anarchists hell-bent on draining the welfare system and turning civil protests into bank-smashing, police-van burning riots. The center-left on the other hand often portray them as misguided & disenfranchised youth whose self-defeating tactics do no good for anyone. Black Bloc are generally considered an anarachist collective, however their motives and methods vary greatly and even the notion that they are all unilaterally anti-state or endorse radical economic systems is not entirely accurate as they lack a centralised ideology. Generally the group dress all in black and stand at the front of protests and act as a barrier between civilian protestors and riot police and have often been known to use to violence and vandalism to achieve their objectives. When I think of the Black Bloc I normally conjure up the image of a pungent crust-punk with A.C.A.B. (All Coppers Are Bastards) knuckle-tattoos dressed head to toe in black kicking in the windows of a Goldman Sachs building and urinating in empty Pepsi bottles to launch at marauding riot police. The movement was originally started in the late 70s in Germany and Holland by squatters as a response to police violence. The idea being that a loose collection of like-minded individuals could protest anonymously with strength in numbers. The movement began to not only represent squatters rights but also anti-globalisation, anti-nuclear power, animal rights and pro-choice movements among others. David van Deusen, co-editor of a collection of writings called the Black Bloc Papers describes the Black Bloc as a group of “Radical collectives—often from within the anarcho-punk scene and typically of working class composition.” “(They) began to urge their members and social militants generally to assemble at demonstrations donning uniform black clothes (with masks), and to march as a single protest contingent (among many others). With their identities effectively hidden in temporary uniformity, they were able to more successfully push protest actions in more militant directions while protecting themselves from being singled out for direct State oppression or later legal charges or both.“ Since then the movement has continued to evolve and grow, growing both in support and condemnation from various elements of society, so much so that Hacktivist collective Anonymous have allegedly been behind the release conflicting statements both supporting and condemning the behaviour of various Black Bloc factions in relation to the Occupy Movement. However half way across the world the Black Bloc have found a new home far from the minor skirmishes and tear gas canisters of the G8 protests. Mohamed Bouazizi, a Tunisian street vendor set himself on fire in January 2011 and the Middle East has been burning ever since. The world is now a radically different place since the start of the Arab Spring after Bouazizi’s death triggered revolutions across the Arab world. Egypt – the world’s most populous Middle Eastern country – was no exception. At the end of January 2011 mass protests in Tahrir Square eventually snowballed into a full blown revolution that led to the ousting of Western backed dictator Hosni Mubarak and the election of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood led by Mohammed Morsi in his place. There remains widespread opposition to Morsi’s government especially after the Muslim Brotherhood pushed through a new constitution that gave the Brotherhood sweeping powers. On top of this the country is still as corrupt as ever with Mubarak’s cronies still in place in the military, police force and the judiciary. Today’s Egypt can be a pretty terrifying place where even a football riot can result in the deaths of 79 people as last year’s Port Said tragedy demonstrates and in recent protests following the death sentences handed out to those involved in the trag…
