---
title: "Anarchism and Education"
author: "Judith Suissa"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judith-suissa-anarchism-and-education"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Philosophical Perspective"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "judith-suissa-anarchism-and-education.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/judith-suissa-anarchism-and-education.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Preface      Acknowledgements      Introduction      1 Anarchism — definitions and questions        Anarchism and Marxism        Anarchism, philosophy of education and liberal suspicions        Liberalism and liberal education          Liberal theory          Liberal education      2 Anarchism and human nature        Human nature in social-anarchist theory        Human nature and the capitalist state        Nurturing the propensity for mutual aid        The ideal of rationality        Human nature in liberalism      3 Anarchist values?        Autonomy in anarchism and liberalism        Reciprocal awareness        Liberal paternalism and libertarianism        Autonomy and community – tensions and questions        Robert Wolff and the argument from autonomy      4 Authority, the state and education        The anarchist objection to the state        Authority      5 The positive core of anarchism        Equality        Fraternity        Liberal values? Anarchist values?        Education for the social virtues      6 Anarchism goes to school        The Escuela Moderna, Barcelona, 1904–1907        The Ferrer School, New York and Stelton, 1911–1953        The Waiden Center and School, Berkeley, 1956–        Other anarchist schools        Summerhill – a non-anarchist experiment        Anarchist schools versus libertarian education        Means and ends in education      7 Education for an anarchist society: Vocational training and political visions        Vocational education: theory and practice          Integral education          Fraternity as a component of integral education          Reconceptualizing the liberal-vocational distinction          Education and the socio-economic structure: cause or effect?          The social-anarchist revolution: within the state and beyond the state          Education and the market          Scarcity and the circumstances of justice        The moral and political content of education          Removing state control of schools          Education for social change        Moral education – the missing link      8 What’s so funny about anarchism?        Liberal neutrality, education and the liberal state        The minimal state and social values        Revolutionary tactics: social anarchism and Marxism        Goals and visions        Utopianism and philosophy of education      Conclusion        Situating anarchism: a reevaluation        An anarchist philosophy of education?        Critiques of anarchism revisited      Bibliography It is nearly five years since the first publication of this book. Reflecting on the work that went into it, and on the discussions that it has prompted with friends and colleagues over the years, there are two points that I would like to make in this preface to the new edition. These concern both the past and the future: the things I said in the book and why I still feel they are important; and the things that were left unsaid that need to be written and, more importantly, acted on. Firstly, the past: For much of the time I spent researching the book, I was buried in, and entranced by, the world of nineteenth-century social anarchists. Sitting in silent archives, rummaging around second-hand bookshops, retracing the steps of Kropotkin in the East End of London and of Francesco Ferrer in the streets of Barcelona, it was easy to get lost in this world, where so much seemed possible. So it comes as no surprise to have been accused, by some readers of the book, of being “romantic” or “utopian”. Yet, annoying though these accusations are, I am not entirely uncomfortable with the label. As I tried to show in the book, engaging with anarchist theory and, particularly with anarchist educational ideas and practice, can help to rescue the word “utopian” from its pejorative connotations and reclaim it as an urgent and committed form of social hope. This project seems particularly timely in our current political climate. Ideas matter, and at a time when we are surrounded by pro…
