---
title: "Biophilia: Toward Re-Humanization"
author: "William Manson"
date: "2010"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-manson-biophilia-toward-re-humanization"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "William Manson has taught anthropology and sociology for many years, and is the author of Riddles of Eros (University Press of America, 1994). From Fifth Estate #360, Spring 2003"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-manson-biophilia-toward-re-humanization.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-manson-biophilia-toward-re-humanization.epub"
    hosted: false
---

As techno-urbanism extends its dominion, imposing mechanized regimentation on all modes of experience, human nature with-ers for want of living sustenance. Deprived of the life-enhancing conditions for expressive self- development, humans in the megamachine become self-alienated rather than self-actualized. The world as mechanized market-place: calculable “market-values” almost entirely replace experiential values (revering, loving, wonder-ing, feeling). The individual increasingly perceives herself as a commodity to be trained and sold to the highest bidder. The dehumanized “cheerful robot,” whose stunted sensibility is an adaptive advantage in competi-tive commerce, may thrive — but the unique, all-round, developed human being is threatened with extinction. [1] The whole individ-ual, uniquely autonomous, is fully formed, and cannot be conformed to the increasingly standardized and overspecialized regime of technical expertise. The relatively unformed, generic inmate of the technocratic system, by contrast, can more readily be reformed (and farther deformed). Those per-sons most susceptible to dehumanization are therefore most “adaptable” to techno-urbanism. With the progressive atrophy of fragile modes of feeling and relat-ing, rhomme machine increasingly exhibits an affectless, calculating, “technomorphic” mentality. The year 2000, Erich Fromm prophe-sied in 1968, might be “the begin-ning of a period in which man ceases to be human and becomes transformed into an unthinking and unfeeling machine.” [2] In the context of a prevailing dehuman syndrome [3] , spontaneous human expression becomes pathologized: “Being open in speech; being unashamed of one’s body; relating to nature; hugging, touching, feeling and making love to other people; refusing to serve in the army and kill; and becoming less dependent on machines are generally considered ‘disturbed behavior’ by a society of robopaths.” [4] Of course, behavioral “modification” is facilitated through ideological training, expanding law enforcement, and emotion-al anesthesia (psychopharmacology). In my view, revitalization of one’s desiccated human-ness first and foremost requires a renewed con-tact with the web of evolved life, with Walt Whitman’s “primal sani-ty” of nature. Transcending the blinkered, bourgeois-utilitarian (mechanistic-industrial) world- view, one can embark on a purification of consciousness, a purging of the detritus of cultural pollution (and a recovery of emotional inno-cence). Withdrawing from the world of urban commerce (and its mind-numbing “messages”), one severs the flow of media propaganda and ceaseless “information” (relating to the ubiquitous “buy-ing” and “selling”). Compulsive “having” is the pathology of deficient “being.” Aesthetic simplicity means disconnecting from repulsive superfluity. Seeking sanctuary in wilder-ness surroundings, one rediscovers the gentler rhythms of low-cost rural living: walking instead of driving, and prevention of disease through a style of living consonant with ecological wisdom. Moreover, “information-process-ing” is largely replaced by an unmediated, sensuous experience of forest, landscape, and isouciant creatures. The graceful, animated flight of a single bird, when per-ceived by the newly-innocent eye, discloses the“expressive language of the living [5] Withdrawing from the brutaliz-ing techno-marketplace (and its ideological delusions), one begins to move more freely as a vital being connected to an infinitely greater, evolved whole. Deficiency-based, culturally programmed “desires” give way to a more unified flow of consciousness — what psychologist Abraham Maslow termed “being-cognition.” [6] This transcendent level of con-sciousness, an intimation of the evolved unity of all things, is the true religiosity discernible in animistic creeds and pantheistic cosmologies. From the perspective of such heightened awareness of meaning, the senseless follies (and horrors) of modernity are simply transient aberrati…
