---
title: "Enemies of Society: An Anthology of Individualist and Egoist Thought"
author: "Lawrence Jarach"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jarach-enemies-of-society-an-anthology-of-individualist-and-egoist-thought"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "reviewed by Lawrence Jarach"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jarach-enemies-of-society-an-anthology-of-individualist-and-egoist-thought.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jarach-enemies-of-society-an-anthology-of-individualist-and-egoist-thought.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Enemies of Society: An Anthology of Individualist and Egoist Thought Edited by Meme, Myself, and I (Ardent Press, 2011) 370 pages, paper. $20 Anarchists are opposed to authority both from below and from above. They do not demand power for the masses, but seek to destroy all power and to decompose these masses into individuals who are masters of their own lives... Anarchy is the aggregation of innumerable and varied forms of life lived in solitude or in free association... It is not by organizing into parties that one struggles for anarchy, nor by mass action which, as has been shown, overthrows one barracks only to create another. It is by the revolt of individuals alone or in small groups, who oppose society, impede its functioning and cause its disintegration. “In Praise of Chaos” by Enzo Martucci This book is designed to provoke its readers, to bring our awareness to the egoist side of the anarchist family tree, an insistently forceful elbowing past the Leftist gatekeepers into the festivities. The individualists and egoists featured in this volume are an indisputable part of the actual real anarchist tradition — whether other anarchists like it or not. As impertinent as an unwanted guest, the authors featured in EoS may be frequently annoying (the constant presence of a rather arrogant and obnoxious S. E. Parker — who eventually abandoned his adherence to anarchism — begins to grate even after only three or four entries). Perhaps as part of the provocation, the editor should have included a Parental Advisory or a Trigger Warning along these lines: “The essays, reviews, and biographies that make up this anthology may alternately or simultaneously induce horror, defensiveness, rage, confusion, frustration, and/or agreement.” If this book wasn’t written as a defiant response to the ahistorical, insulting, retrograde Black Flame (see review in #68/69), it should have been. The authors of BF invented the Broad Anarchist Tradition™ (in a transparently Orwellian manner, by confining their definition of anarchism to be merely a form of syndicalism), and inducted such obviously absurd figures as self-identified Marxists like the Irish nationalist James Connolly and the founder/lifetime leader of the US-based Socialist Labor Party Daniel DeLeon at the same time as they pared it down to exclude Pierre-Joseph Proudhon — love him or hate him, he was the first person who proudly called himself an anarchist. And of course they excluded the bogeyman of all leftist ideologues, Max Stirner; the editor of EoS has taken it upon her_himself to make sure that nobody can do that in the future without comment. The editor of Enemies of Society has taken the deliberate path of opening up a long-neglected and deliberately invisibilized aspect of anarchist thought to a modern readership. From the introduction: As a philosophical weapon, anarchist thought has become dull, has lost its once-lethal edge and become encrusted with leftist clichés. One of the purposes of compiling these outsider voices is to help relieve anti-authoritarians of the burden of carrying the impossible load of universal emancipation (this leftist ideal of herd-life that undermines our individual strength) and to help re-awaken the slumbering dragon of insurrectionary egoism. These are the voices of uncompromising individualists, to whom no topic is taboo or off-limits, voices that have stayed obscure until now, but for which the myriad complexities of our current era provide an excellent context for a re-appearance. What ultimately emerges from these writings is a vision of anarchy that is non-utopian, non-idealist, and decidedly non-leftist, a vision of anarchy that could accurately be described as anti-social, or at least socially pessimistic ... Any sketches of an anarchistic future they offer are apparent only by inference. (xxiii) The term “individualism” has several different meanings in an anarchist context, depending on who’s using it, and whether it’s being used to sco…
