---
title: "Come Hell or High Water"
author: "Delfina Vannucci &amp; Richard Singer"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/delfina-vannuci-richard-singer-come-hell-or-high-water"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Handbook on Collective Process Gone Awry"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "delfina-vannuci-richard-singer-come-hell-or-high-water.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/delfina-vannuci-richard-singer-come-hell-or-high-water.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     PREFACE      INTRODUCTION      IS THIS REALLY DEMOCRACY        DEMOCRATIC PROCESS SUBVERTED        A CLOSER LOOK AT CONSENSUS        THE BAGGAGE OF COLLECTIVE MEMBERS        POWER SHARING          The Formation of a Ruling Elite          The Responsibilities of Collective Members        RED FLAGS TO GUARD AGAINST          Group Behaviors:          Individual Behaviors:        TACTICS USED TO SUBVERT DEMOCRATIC PROCESS          At Meetings:          Within the Group's Larger Dynamic:        THE PARTICULAR VULNERABILITY OF COLLECTIVES        THE PROBLEM WITH POLITENESS        THE NEED FOR KINDNESS        CREATING PARIAHS        GOOD-FAITH AND BAD-FAITH CHARACTER ASSASSINATIONS        BANNING        RESPECT FOR DIFFERENCES        PERSONAL VS. GROUP ISSUES        MICRO-MANAGING OTHER PEOPLE’S BEHAVIOR          Stacking          Prioritizing        SKEPTICISM IS HEALTHY        VAGUENESS LEADS TO AUTHORITARIANISM          Common Misunderstandings of Consensus          Skill Sharing      IS THIS THE JUST SOCIETY WE WANT TO MODEL?        A MODEL FOR JUSTICE?        THE DEARTH OF DUE PROCESS        WHAT ABOUT FREE SPEECH?          Regarding Free Speech at Meetings          Regarding Free Speech on the Internet          Regarding Free Speech for Others          In General        CRUELTY        THE COLLECTIVE IS NOT ALWAYS MORE CORRECT THAN THE INDIVIDUAL      MAKING IT WORK        FOR NEWCOMERS        FOR OLD-SCHOOLERS        RELINQUISHING CONTROL        STAYING TRUE TO THE MISSION        WHAT'S A LONE PERSON TO DO?        THIS COULDN'T HAPPEN IN OUR COLLECTIVE        GETTING THINGS DONE        SOME CARDINAL POINTS TO KEEP IN MIND WHEN CONFLICT ARISES:        CODIFYING THE COLLECTIVE PROCESS        THERE’S HOPE Welcome to the collective book on collective process! Over the course of the twenty or so years that AK Press has been publishing and distributing anarchist and radical literature, we've gotten a lot of requests for good, short overviews of topics that are of interest to the folks in our communities: anarchism, worker's rights, solidarity economics, and countless other things. We do our best to seek out books to publish or distribute that meet our readers’ needs, but it can take a while to find exactly the right author or book. One of the most common requests we get is for a short-and-sweet introduction to collectives. Despite the proliferation of collectives and directly-democratic organizations—including AK Press—there has never been enough literature on collectives, and how they function (probably because the people in all of those collectives are too busy to sit down and write about the work they're doing!). So, we were really happy to discover Richard Singer and Delfina Vannucci’s overview of the ins and outs of collective processes and to have the chance to put it out in book form. Their book explores the countless pitfalls that can prevent healthy collective process, while continually reminding us of the ethical and political goals that made us form collectives in the first place and providing us with solid techniques to realize them. As members of a functioning and far-from-perfect collective, we've found their insights incredibly useful ... and are pretty sure you will too. Collectives are difficult beasts. The idea behind them is ultimately a simple one: a group of people working together towards a common goal, equally sharing in the efforts to attain that goal, whatever it may be. No one person is in charge, no individual’s voice is any more or any less important than any other’s, and every decision is a collaborative one, born of discussions designed to reflect the will and the wishes of each and every member of the group. People, however, are complex, perhaps more so than we tend to realize on a day-to-day basis. In the multiple decades that the members of our collective have worked in community, activist, and politically-oriented structures, we've realized that we're never so cognizant of the immense difference…
