---
title: "Do you hear, Maidan?"
author: "Serhiy Kemsky"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/serhiy-kemsky-do-you-hear-maidan"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The following article was written by the Ukrainian anarchist Serhiy Kemsky, an activist that participated in the Maidan revolution, proposing the replacement of the existing Ukrainian state with institutions of direct democracy. Just one day before President Viktor Yanukovych signed the agreement to"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "serhiy-kemsky-do-you-hear-maidan.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/serhiy-kemsky-do-you-hear-maidan.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Implement Article 5 of the Constitution        Permanent Maidan throughout Ukraine        The next steps I am surprised by the statements that have been heard recently on social networks. Like, the Maidan lacks meanings, leaders, plans, motivations or something else. After talking to dozens of Maidan protesters, I was personally convinced that everyone has their own vision of further action. Moreover, it is possible to generalize all these visions, because they do not contradict each other. This article is an attempt at such a generalization. I hope that everyone who cares will join the constructive conversation, and together we will formulate a joint action plan. Maidan chants “Gang away!” and really wants the current helmsmen to vacate their seats. At the same time, everyone agrees that we did not gather here to elect a new good king. The demand of the community is to transform the state from a feudal whip into an instrument of self-organization of society. We no longer need shepherds — we need community executors who can effectively coordinate public resources to achieve common goals. The Maidan demands that people in power care about public values, not family values. In addition to the head of the vertical power, many abuses are committed by local officials. People suffer from them not only in Lviv and Kyiv, but also in Donetsk and Sevastopol. Maidan, referring to Article 5 of the Constitution, invented a remedy against this, formulated by Les Podervianskyi. If we express this demand in bold political terms, we are talking about the development of instruments of direct democracy in Ukraine. In particular, we need legal instruments through which society can influence laws and those who have to implement them. Ideally, the positions of heads of regional police departments, district courts, prosecutor’s offices, etc. should be elected. Some believe that society is not ready for so many elections, so today it is possible to limit the right of a community to dismiss any official who operates in that community. For example, the President of Ukraine can be dismissed by all citizens of Ukraine; head of the department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the region — residents of the relevant region; the chairman of the appellate court of the city — citizens of this city, the chairman of the district court — people living in this district; the head of ZhEK — inhabitants of the houses which are served by this office. In order to initiate such a resignation, the citizens of Ukraine should not prove to anyone the validity of their demand — to look for which article of the code was violated by the official. The universal reason for dismissal is that they “lost the trust of citizens.” If an official is fired after a local referendum, he or she should be deprived of all civil servant benefits and receive a minimum pension when he or she reaches old age. He may not be appointed to any public office, but must not be restricted in his right to be elected by citizens to an elected office. It is necessary that after several showy dismissals they resign themselves, without waiting for the people to express their distrust and deprive them of the last cookies. I would call it a permanent lustration: cleansing not from those who once collaborated with someone, but from those who are now ruining the lives of Ukrainian citizens or may decide to do so in the future. In order to implement this requirement, we need changes in the legislation on referendums on the people’s initiative — and not only on the possibility of dismissing officials through referendums. The procedure for initiating referendums needs to be brought up to European standards. For example, in Switzerland, which has a population of 8 million, 50,000 signatures are needed to initiate a referendum, which is about one and a half percent of citizens. In Spain, which has a population of 45 million, there are just over one percent of 500,000. In Ukraine, this figure is 3 million s…
