---
title: "Anarchisms Otherwise"
author: "Macarena Gómez-Barris"
date: "2026"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/macarena-gomez-barris-anarchisms-otherwise-pedagogies-of-anarco-indigenous-feminist-critique-1"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Pedagogies of Anarco-Indigenous Feminist Critique"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "macarena-gomez-barris-anarchisms-otherwise-pedagogies-of-anarco-indigenous-feminist-critique-1.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/macarena-gomez-barris-anarchisms-otherwise-pedagogies-of-anarco-indigenous-feminist-critique-1.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Biography        Start        Figures of Decolonial History: From Cholas to Pailliris        Anarco Feminism Now        References Macarena Gómez-Barris is a scholar and writer who works at the intersections of art, environment, feminist-cuir politics, and decolonial theory and praxis. She is the author of four books, Where Memory Dwells: Culture and State Violence in Chile (2009), The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and Decolonial Perspectives (2017), Beyond the Pink Tide: Art and Political Undercurrents in the Américas (2018), and Towards a Sociology of a Trace (2010, with Herman Gray). She is completing a new book on the colonial Anthropocene, At the Sea’s Edge: Liquidity Beyond Colonial Extinction (Forthcoming Duke University Press 2022). She is Founding Director of the Global South Center (see globalsouthcenter.org), and Chairperson of Department of Social Science and Cultural Studies at Pratt Institute, Brooklyn. Macarena was a Fulbright fellow in 2014–2015 at the Sociology and Gender Department in FLACSO Ecuador, Quito. She is co-editor with Diana Taylor of Dissident Acts , a Duke University Press series. How might we approach the relationship between anarchism and feminism as a response to the continuing structures of racialized gendered violence central to the horizon of our radical imaginaries? [1] How might we re-envision anarchisms in creative and generative ways, as an experience that thwarts the project of intimate, state, and corporate violence that depends upon the extraction of the racialized female/sexed body for its expansion? [2] Learning from the work of U.S. Native feminisms, Black feminisms and women of color feminist theories in the Global North, as well as anarcho-Indigenous feminisms and praxis from the Américas allows us to address longstanding issues of how to historicize gendered violence within the matrix of coloniality and the modern nation state. [3] In this essay I frame ‘anarchisms otherwise’ [4] — modes of relationality that step across the masculine archive of anarchistic activity towards experiential, embodied, and phenomenological modes of organizing below and against the activities of the state. These anarchisms otherwise, as I discuss elsewhere, challenge genealogies of anarchistic activity that do not consider the essential role of social reproduction and invisible work within the matrix of colonial power or the routinized condition of violence that extends from the intimate to the nation-state and beyond. [5] More directly, they forget how the Indigenous female body and embodiment is a site of ongoing war by the state, and how anarco-Indigenous feminists use their bodies as a site of counter-attack. The ‘otherwise’ here points to disruptive, anti-normative, and decolonial activities that makes for individual and collective action, dissident acts that accrue meaning across time and space after colonialism. By attending to modes of organizing from within the Américas that address authoritarianism, heteropatriarchy, colonialism, and capitalism, we begin to imagine what a politics of liberation looks like that stretches far beyond one horizon of activity. And, by focusing on the figures of female laborers and social movement leaders dating from the colonial period into modernity, we extend the largely male anarchist archive that imprisons stories of Indigenous and Black women’s experiences as well as forms of denouncement and insurgent solidarities that do not always show up within the social movement archive. Though Andean history has been described as a permanent space of insurrection by Steven Sándor John and others, [6] anarchism itself is often code for Occidental and Western European forms of social organization. Narratives of uprisings and horizontal activity often run through genealogies of male anarchist events that occlude female participation. What anarchisms otherwise emerge to delink from European historiography? To frame this question in this way allows us to enter i…
