---
title: "Equality"
author: "William Batchelder Greene"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-batchelder-greene-equality"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This series of articles from The Worcester Palladium would be incorporated into Equality (1849) and Mutual Banking (1850)&lt;em&gt;, which would, in turn, become the basis for the subsequent editions of William Batchelder Greene’s Mutual Banking. https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/featured-articl"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-batchelder-greene-equality.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-batchelder-greene-equality.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     1. Equality.      2. The Banking System.      3. The Repeal of the Usury Laws.      4. The Red Republic.      5. Plutocracy.      6. Cain and Abel. For the Palladium. What particularly characterized Sparta? Sparta was the city of the equals: the social name of the citizens of Sparta was this— the equals . Sparta was composed of ten thousand citizens, organized upon the principle of equality; and these citizens ruled over thirty thousand Laconians who were not possessed of this title of equals; over a multitude of Helots; and over a multitude of Slaves. Sparta was thus an embodiment of the most horrible inequality, if we consider it according to the totality of men who composed the empire of Lacedæmon, and lived on its territory. But Sparta was a model fraternity, a model equality, a model community, if we consider the true Lacedemonians only, that is to say, the equals. Sparta was regarded by all the grave and serious philosophers of antiquity as the inspiring city; in their eyes it was holy and venerable, even as Rome was holy to the Romans, and Jerusalem to the Jews. Why was Sparta thus regarded as holy? It was because, in the midst of this atrocious barbarity, in the midst of this cruel inequality, a holy idea was embodied, the idea of equality —the equality of a certain number, though not of all. This principle of equality was consecrated in the great Spartan Sacrament, the repast in common . No man could be present at the repasts who was not one of the equals; and no one could be considered one of the equals who did not attend the repasts regularly. Participation in the common repasts was the sacramental sign of citizenship, and conferred the right of voting in public affairs. A citizen of Sparta, therefore, was a man who took his place at the public banquets: this is the summing up of the legislation of Lycurgus, whose whole system is involved in the institution of the Social Banquets. This institution of the repast in common, was not an isolated institution of Crete and Sparta; for Aristotle tells us that it was widely extended; that it was established especially in Italy and at Carthage. Be this as it may, it cannot be denied that the repast in common obtained in Egypt. The people of Egypt were divided into three classes; that of priests, that of warriors, and that of laborers and mechanics. The two higher classes, the priests and the warriors, lived in community; the priests by themselves, and the warriors by themselves. The priests of Egypt, like the monks of the middle ages, had no private property, but lived in common, in edifices belonging to their order. As for the warriors, a certain portion of land was assigned to each of them; but no warrior was permitted to cultivate the same field two years in succession, for fear that he should attach himself to it, and consider it as his own private property. The people of Egypt were divided into two camps; in one were the priests and the warriors, who constituted the aristocracy; in the other was the mass of the people. The priests among themselves, and the warriors among themselves, lived in community, according to the principle of equality; and the people were taxed to support them. The people, the inferior caste, owned in their own right the property which was in their hands; they were proprietors, and paid taxes. The members of the higher castes had no interest separate from that of the corporations to which they belonged; they were exempt therefore from envy and jealousy, and sat down as brethren and equals, with their brethren and equals at the common banquets: the members of the lower castes were given over to competition among themselves, they had nothing in common with each other; they looked upon each other as rivals and enemies; they ground each other as mill stones grind each other when they have no corn to grind; and thus, divided among themselves, hostile to each other, moved by cupidity, and recognizing neither equality nor fraternity, they became the …
