---
title: "Anarchism in the United States"
author: "Jesse Cohn, Gabriel Kuhn, Ronald Creagh"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ronald-creagh-gabriel-kuhn-jesse-cohn-anarchism-in-the-united-states"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Creagh, Ronald. “Anarchism in the United States to 1945.” In The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest: 1500 to the Present, edited by Immanuel Ness, 155–158. Vol. 1. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. Kuhn, Gabriel, and Jesse Cohn. “Anarchism in the United States, 1946–Present.” The "
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ronald-creagh-gabriel-kuhn-jesse-cohn-anarchism-in-the-united-states.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ronald-creagh-gabriel-kuhn-jesse-cohn-anarchism-in-the-united-states.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anarchism in the United States to 1945          Anarchism at Large          Communal Experiments          The 1848 Revolutions          Prelude to the Civil War          The International Workingmen’s Association          The Social Revolutionaries          Immigrant Circles          The International Impact          References And Suggested Readings        Anarchism in the United States, 1946–Present          Partial Revival of Anarchism in the 1960s and 1970s          Second Revival: The 1980s and 1990s          References And Suggested Readings Ronald Creagh Historians have adopted two approaches in their study of anarchism in the United States. Some narratives concentrate on individuals and grassroots movements with relatively well-defined connections to a historical anarchist movement. Others seek traces of anarchism in a broader sense, in fields such as art or philosophy or in some independent group or personality. There is indeed no single “essence” of anarchism but a wealth of perspectives as well as unexpected rebirths. Both approaches require specific narratives. Elements of anarchism in the broad sense of rebellions against the state or other established authorities appear during the colonial period and up to the Civil War, while after the 1870s, it is mostly absorbed by emergent anarchist organizations. Both currents will fade after World War I due to a variety of causes: mass culture and repression progressively corrode working-class institutions, union leaders are integrated into the establishment, and the Russian Revolution and the New Deal promote participation in political parties as the sole avenue to social change. Before World War II, protest movements rarely dissent with “the system,” but on the contrary call for state recognition of their requests. Early colonial dissent offers evidence of anti-statism, originating from the religious and socio-economic radicalism developed by lower-class spokespersons at the time of the English Civil War. Antinomianism opposed inner inspiration to political laws, and in the New England controversy of 1636–8, John Wheelwright went so far as to make a principled condemnation of all legislation. His sister-in-law, Anne Hutchinson, opened in her house a group for free discussion of ministers’ sermons, to the great displeasure of the orators. Exiled to Rhode Island, the anti-nomian mystics rejected all civil authority, with one William Harris claiming that the people should shortly cry out, “No lords, no masters.” The Pennsylvania Quakers had anarchistic patterns of decision-making, and although they voted, they refused to be sworn in and could not run for office; they also rejected many components of public administration such as army, police, and bureaucracy. The frontier spirit called for decentralization, community self-organization, a distrust of hierarchies, and a form of individualism quite different from the European bourgeois posture: one had to count on one’s own resources, learn community life, and make decisions without relying on opinion or prejudice. All through colonial history and even afterwards, a number of riots and rebellions could better be described as insurrections. These uprisings appeared at a time when the state’s hold over society was somewhat fragile and collectivities felt deprived of their rights. Such was the case of early movements like Shays’ Rebellion and other revolts, including those of black slaves, and at the end of the nineteenth century, the Filipino independence struggle. The American Revolution offered lessons for the future. After all, the Boston Tea Party was an example of direct action and the war against the British was an insurrection. The American anarchist contestation of state authority could find a justification in the Declaration of Independence which asserted the rights of people “to dissolve the political bonds which have connected them with one another” and abolish governments “which have become destructive.” In spi…
