---
title: "The Doctrine of the Fathers and Anarchism-Biocosmism"
author: "Alexander Svyatogor"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-svyatogor-the-doctrine-of-the-fathers-and-anarchism-biocosmism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published in Biocosmist no. 3–4 (May–June 1922): 3–21. Biocosmist was the magazine of the Russian and Moscow Anarchists-Biocosmists. Translated by Caroline Rees and re-published as Chapter 5 in Boris Groys (ed.) Russian Cosmism (2015). ISBN 9780262344906. Retrieved on 31st October 2021 fr"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alexander-svyatogor-the-doctrine-of-the-fathers-and-anarchism-biocosmism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-svyatogor-the-doctrine-of-the-fathers-and-anarchism-biocosmism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        10        11        12        13        14        15        16        17        18        19        20        21        22        23 We, who have raised the flag of a new ideology, are interested in the role of anarchism in the Revolution—primarily in the aspects concerning its thought. We will examine the main direction taken by this thought, which is divided into two chronological periods. During its first period, this thought remains 100 percent faithful to the “doctrine of the fathers.” It is, in fact, unequivocally and slavishly subordinate to it. Bound by tradition and uncritical, it stands united. “Unified anarchism” is therefore the right term for this first, uncritical period. The second, critical period begins as a consequence of the unsuccessful leap into anarchy. Severe revolutionary reality (it could not be otherwise) has led to a revision of the principles of its founding fathers. Both periods have revealed the inadequacy of the doctrine of the fathers, calling into question the validity of anarchist thought per se and consequently driving it into a state of impasse. We believe that deliverance is possible only through Biocosmism. We will deal with anarchist thought as follows. We are not concerned here with the chiefly national and historical reasons for its main characteristics. Neither will we attempt a causal explanation of its character, or try to justify it from an impartial, historical point of view. It is clear that it proved unworkable during the Revolution and is, therefore, indefensible. We believe that weakness and immaturity are its main characteristics. It has all the signs of immaturity and its critical side is too weak and underdeveloped. It is absolutely unable to make any independent judgment as to reality and its content. It is unable to analyze the succession of experiences and events that have occurred, and has no idea of the workings of a whole complex of reasons and great ideas behind them. Its powers of analysis are purely formalistic, as well as superficial and unrealistic. The same is true of its capacity for synthesis. Immature and weak thinking easily becomes subordinate to authority. The weaker it is, the more subordinate it becomes, with a correspondingly diminished field of vision and sense of independence. Anarchist thought is too dependent on authority. It has raised the fathers’ doctrine to the status of vox Dei and become a slave to tradition. It is true that it is outwardly active, but its energy is one in which individuality is subservient to doctrine and blindly follows authority to the letter. It is naturally subordinate, unoriginal, and one-sided because it is weak and repressed, and this has had a drastic effect on its outward form. It wears an eloquent mantle of rhetorical utterances and expressions, but how monotone, hackneyed, stereotypical, and deadpan all these are! Not one word is truly alive, authoritative, and original, able to provoke serious attention or, at the very least, attest to a sense of independent inquiry. These are the principal characteristics of anarchist thought in the first period. Then, because of the pressure of disappointments, a critical element begins to be voiced, but still cannot free itself from its chief flaw: a belief in the infallibility of its past commandments. Laboring under tradition, it grows weak, its “doctrine” sucking it dry and depriving it of the lifeblood that would enable it to open out independently onto a new path with a wide-open vista before it. We must differentiate between two cycles of “unified anarchism”: the Moscow cycle and the Ukrainian cycle. Superficially, they seem to represent different types of anarchism, but essentially, and especially from the point of view of thought, they are intrinsically connected enough for each one to seem merely one part of a single, organic whole. The Moscow cycle covers a period of agitation and p…
