---
title: "The Epidemic of Rage in Spain (1996–2007)"
author: "Los Tigres de Sutullena"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/los-tigres-de-sutullena-the-epidemic-of-rage-in-spain-1996-2007"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Let them take away what we danced for"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "los-tigres-de-sutullena-the-epidemic-of-rage-in-spain-1996-2007.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/los-tigres-de-sutullena-the-epidemic-of-rage-in-spain-1996-2007.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     I. Once upon a time...        1. Official anarchism.        2. Youth antagonism        3. A typical day in Cordoba      II. The role of insurrectionalism        1. The eruption of insurrectionalism        2. Vanguardist individualism?        3. The Iberian drift of insurrectionalist ideas Believe me, the way we operate, on the fringes of the law, anything less than the strictest honesty could have fatal consequences. Jack London, The Assassination Bureau, Ltd. For some time now, some comrades have felt the need to take stock of the experience accumulated in the Spanish state by sectors of anarchist, communist and autonomous militants, who for a certain period of time converged around a certain “insurrectionary” idea. This need arose from two circumstances. The first is the evidence that a stage has come to an end. We are not at the same point as we were ten years ago — not even five years ago — and we want to draw the relevant conclusions in order to better face battles that are not in the misty future, but are already looming over us. To this end, it is essential to open a debate, or at least to provoke reflection. The second circumstance that prompts us to write is the complete lack of knowledge of the events of the last ten years on the part of the new generations of comrades. It must be said that this lack of knowledge is largely due to the degree to which the lack of communication between us has taken over, almost completely replacing direct contact and knowledge. But it is also the measure of our failure to raise up points of reference with which these comrades could identify: projects of struggle and poles of aggregation that would have given continuity and depth to a combative effort that was no small thing. This failure is that of what for a time was called “informal organisation”, and with hindsight we realise that it was a failure that was part of the very assumptions from which we started. Despite this, we have no regrets, we do not believe that we have wasted our time or that our comrades have wasted theirs. Today it is all too easy to look at a pile of ashes and say that “it was all a mistake”, that the staff simply “lost their minds”. This false criticism forgets, out of self-interest or ignorance, the conditioning factors that were at work at the time. It takes us back to square one — to the leaden illusions of official anarchism or the blithe unconsciousness of youthful antagonism — and thus paves the way for everything to repeat itself again in an indeterminate period of time, within that “cyclical time” so characteristic of political environments sheltered by history. It is much more difficult, and uncomfortable for everyone, to rehearse a dialectical analysis of what happened. The conditions from which we started left no other way out than the one that fortunately occurred. The epidemic of rage was not just another aesthetic/ideological ghetto fad: all the hypotheses that were formulated at the time were tested to the last consequences. Even if the results were often disastrous, this is the foundation of a collective experience worthy of the name, which is why self-criticism is possible. In terms of positive results, they are far from the maximalism that has alienated us on so many occasions, but they are there. These years have made it possible to definitively overcome two decades of inertia and paralysis in the libertarian movement of which we were the unwitting heirs. But above all they have served to put central questions such as revolution and organisation back on the table, not as inert ideological certainties, but as living, complex, dynamic problems. These results, perhaps small in the immediate but qualitatively important because of the possibilities they open up, have also had a tragic cost paid by those comrades who were and are targets of repression. We dedicate these pages to them. We must point out that this paper is not intended to settle anything, but to make a contribution in line with…
