---
title: "The Bomb at Haymarket"
author: "Sidney Lens"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sidney-lens-the-bomb-at-haymarket"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Roediger, Dave, and Franklin Rosemont, eds. Haymarket Scrapbook. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr Publishing Co., 1986. Retrieved on August 11, 2016 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sidney-lens-the-bomb-at-haymarket.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sidney-lens-the-bomb-at-haymarket.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The Long Strike of 1875 and the Railroad War of 1877 were defensive actions to avert wage cuts at a time when the advance of organized labor generally was sliding backward. The national strike for the eight-hour day that began on May 1, 1886, marked a change in proletarian direction. The movement had expanded since the setbacks of the 1870s and was poised for a major leap forward, the accomplishment of a dream held for generations. The National Laborer had expressed the belief back in 1836, when the workday was still twelve hours long and often more, that “eight hours daily labor is more than enough for any man to perform.” The demand was heard more frequently in the 1850s through the efforts of a few special groups launched specifically to win that objective and proclaimed at many labor meetings. Then in 1863 the Machinists and Blacksmiths Union and the Boston Trades Assembly jointly appropriated $800 to lobby for eight hours, entrusting the task to a relatively young machinist in his early thirties, Ira Steward. For Steward, who devoted his life to this one goal, the shorter workday was more than a means of gaining leisure; it would give the workingman an opportunity to study politics and formulate plans to check the “corruptions of capital.” It was the only means, said Steward, to preserve democracy and emancipate workers “from slavery and ignorance and the vices and poverty.” Steward’s wife, Mary, composed a couplet, soon to be heard on thousands of lips: Whether you work by the piece or work by the day, Decreasing the hours, increases the pay. On Steward’s initiative hundreds of Eight-Hour Leagues were formed from 1865 to 1868, fifty in California alone, and together with the National Labor Union-founded by one of the noblest of labor leaders, William H. Sylvis-the agitation was accelerated. Responding to the voxpopuli six states and a number of cities legislated eight-hour labor laws in 1868, and Congress passed a bill covering its own employees. Most of the laws, however, were full of glaring loopholes-some requiring, for instance, that both the worker and the employer concur before the shorter workday could become operative. In other instances wages were cut proportionate to the cut in hours, thus making the law meaningless. In the end the entire effort turned out to be a pyrrhic victory. But the idea of the eight-hour day, which was latent during the bleak 1870s, became overt in the 1880s-as a combination of prosperity and interunion rivalry gave it momentum — The 1880s, despite the 1883–85 slump, witnessed fabulous economic expansion. Capital invested in manufacture zoomed from $2.8 billion to $6.5 billion, the number of factory hands doubled and five and a quarter million immigrants came to these shores seeking surcease from Europe’s sorrow. Though labor shared minutely, if at all, in the materialist glories of the decade-President Grover Cleveland in 1888 spoke of the poor being “trampled to death beneath an iron heel”--no nation on earth was doing nearly so well over-all as the United States. There was a feeling in proletarian circles that capital could afford the shorter day (at the old pay) without too much strain, and that now was the time to get it. The union rivalry referred to above was more subtle. It was between two organizations with unwieldy names-the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions of the United States and Canada, formed in 1881 under the guiding hand of a Dutch-Jewish cigarmaker born in London, Samuel Gompers; and the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor, secretly established in 1869 by nine garment workers in Philadelphia. Neither was particularly massive in membership at the beginning of the decade, but by 1886 the Knights had spurted to 700,000 members, probably more than all the previous labor federations combined. A strike in 1885 against the three rail lines controlled by Jay Gould-the Wabash, the Missouri Pacific, and the Missouri, Kansas and Texas-had gained for the Knights a qui…
