---
title: "Arriba los que luchan! Lessons in Struggle from Uruguayan Anarchists"
author: "Juan Verala Luz"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lessons-in-struggle-from-uruguayan-anarchists"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2023-10-28 from redblacknotes.com/2023/10/09/lessons-in-struggle-from-uruguayan-anarchists"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lessons-in-struggle-from-uruguayan-anarchists.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lessons-in-struggle-from-uruguayan-anarchists.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Juan Verala Luz reviews Anarchist Popular Power: Dissident Labor and Armed Struggle in Uruguay 1956–1976 . This review began as opening remarks at a recent book launch for Anarchist Popular Power. You can read excerpts from the original statement in this report , and listen to it alongside a discussion with historian Troy Araiza Kokinis in a forthcoming It’s Going Down podcast episode. Compounding crises that neither capitalism nor the nation-state can solve have compelled many newcomer and veteran militants alike to (re-)engage in social movements across the world . In the United States, Occupy Wall Street’s explosive expansion ; mass mobilizations to secure Black lives against all instantiations of white supremacy; airport shutdowns to oppose xenophobic, anti-Muslim policies; direct confrontations with anti-LGBTQ fascist footsoldiers; and more all signal the resurgence of collective struggle. Even more, hundreds of thousands have started and joined labor unions over the last several years. Insurgent strike waves before COVID-19 inspired everyday people to fight for more than the short end of the “deal” the decaying American empire and its grotesque elite offers in a post-shutdown world, growing the number of strikes over 50% since 2021. Tenant unions of, by, and for ourselves have coalesced into a multinational network , coordinating cross-regional campaigns to support shared struggles. And a forceful movement opposing police expansion in Atlanta’s Weelaunee Forest has spawned nationwide actions against Cop City’s partners and similar campaigns in other locales. Despite our important inroads towards rebuilding robust, combative movements, we have still struggled to wrest major concessions. Momentary victories like a killer cop’s conviction and modest defense against pandemic layoffs offer temporary reprieves from these systems’ worst excesses, but business as usual typically returns once the mass heat in the streets simmers. Cycles of crisis, conflagration, and cooldown have compelled many to revisit and newly probe historical experiences and compañeras for strategic guidance. One such inspiring case is the subject of Troy Andreas Araiza Kokinis’s brilliant first book Anarchist Popular Power: Dissident Labor and Armed Struggle in Uruguay, 1956–76 : the Federación Anarquista Uruguaya, more commonly acronymed as the FAU. Over the last several years, editors at AK Press have worked with the UC San Diego and Santa Barbara faculty, service industry worker, and freelance sign painter to transform his doctoral dissertation into the first full-length English language history of this small but globally influential anarchist cadre and the widespread militancy they simultaneously took inspiration from and inspired. Araiza Kokinis weaves together archival research, including records clandestinely concealed during the dictatorship by FAU members (pp. 20, 120), a unique database of labor actions constructed from the Uruguayan Communist Party’s (PCU) newspapers (p. 273, note 24), and militants’ memoirs, and conversations with surviving veterans spread across the River Plate region to bring us the story of the FAU’s and the Uruguayan working class’s tremendous journey from the verge of insurrection to government-sponsored military repression and dictatorship. With approximately eighty core militantes (p. 4), the FAU charted its own anarchist path through a unique combination of political synthesis and trial-and-error that Araiza Kokinis’s close readings of the organization’s original texts unearth. Especifismo , its foremost contribution, argues that anarchists must simultaneously develop a shared politico-ideological vision and goals while advocating for their principles, strategies, and tactics within larger social movements. Like Peter Kropotkin (pp. 76–77), Mikhail Bakunin, Errico Malatesta, and other European forerunners to the “dual organizationalist” tradition, they insisted anarchists maintain specific “anarchist organizations” to e…
