---
title: "The Future Is A Scam"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-future-is-a-scam"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Reflection about the desire to not have children"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-future-is-a-scam.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-future-is-a-scam.epub"
    hosted: false
---

This text is the result of a reflection and doesn’t aim to be exhaustive. We are aware that the topic to which we come up is delicate and that this text will probably trigger strong reactions. Nevertheless, we think that it’s important to talk about it given the hegemony of the pro-natalist thought and the consequences it generates. Our reflection starts from an anarchist thought and so from a will to get over with a world which is authoritarian, industrialized, speciesist, etc. First publication in France, in April 2019 When we are writing these lines, the Earth has about 7.7 billion human beings. At the Middle Ages there were less than 500 million. During the 19 th century, this number reached over a billion. The step of two billion has been passed in the 20’s, the step of three billion has been passed just before the 60’s. Around 1975, there were more than four billion human individuals. Between 1985 and 1990, five billion human beings trod on the Earth soil. Before the 2000’s, the stage of six billion was passed and we have finally gone over the seven billion during the first half of the 2010’s. For anyone who is not happy at the idea of seeing this number increase again, the future promises to be quite dark. The lowest estimations expect an increase until 2080 while the highest ones expect a constant increase until at least 2100. For the moment, the forecasts don’t go beyond this date. For us, as we will see later on, the human being is overcrowded and this overpopulation undeniably affects, both the environment and all the animals, including ourselves. If this growth is indeed generally decreasing, it’s still a growth, and in this respect, is problematic to us. In a time when there were about seven times less human individuals, quite a few anarchists was already asking themselves the questions that we ask ourselves today. At the end of the 18 th century, an economist, Thomas Malthus already thought about the issue of the birth rate. He theorized that the increase of the available resources didn’t follow the growth of the population and that there would be a moment when they would run out. To avoid that, he recommended a birth control. However, his thought joins with the morals of his time, advocating the delay of the age of marriage and chastity before it. Besides, he proposed that the couples get the strict number of children they were sure to be in capacity to support. He also recommended stopping giving financial support to the poorest people. His thought seems to be more turned against the latter and doesn’t challenge the Family model. In itself, the Malthus’ thought doesn’t really interest us given that its more turned towards the Economics and social control than towards an emancipatory reflection. Nevertheless, quite a few anarchists at the end of 19 th century have started from this idea that an infinite growth of the population would sooner or later end up to be in conflict with the fact that the available resources are limited. This new thought is called neo-Malthusianism and the anarchists who agreed with it, neo-Malthusians. Despite being in minority, they have worked on adapting Malthusianism to their emancipatory perspectives, especially affirming that children who were born were destined for becoming either canon or boss fodder. This adaptation also included individual solutions for birth control thanks to the promotion of means of contraception and the defense of abortion, position which was avant-garde at the time. It should be noted that at this time, the contraception being almost undeveloped, a great number of births weren’t wanted, many families lived in poverty and weren’t able to support children and make them autonomous and responsible individuals. In France, neo-Malthusianism is initiated by Paul Robin in 1895, inspired by the British neo-Malthusianism, influenced itself by eugenics-based theories which began to emerge at this time. It’s unfortunate that neo-Malthusianism has been suffused with e…
