---
title: "Dialogues with David Graeber: Anarchy--In a Manner of Speaking"
author: "Wayne Price"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-price-dialogues-with-david-graeber-anarchy-in-a-manner-of-speaking"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Review of David Graeber, Anarchy—In a Manner of Speaking; Conversations with Mehdi Belhaj Kacem, Nika Dubrovsky, & Assia Turquier-Zauberman (2020; Zurich: Diaphanes Anarchies)"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wayne-price-dialogues-with-david-graeber-anarchy-in-a-manner-of-speaking.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-price-dialogues-with-david-graeber-anarchy-in-a-manner-of-speaking.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The late David Graeber was an influential anarchist and anthropologist, a theorist, a writer, and an activist. He died in September 2020, at the untimely age of 59. As far as I know, this may be his last published book. This little volume is a transcript of his discussion with three interviewers. They are artists of various sorts (two are actors), philosophers, and writers. Nika Dubrovsky was also Graeber’s wife. The book is interesting because it covers a wide range of topics which concerned Graeber, although its briefness limited the extent he could go into any issue. Modestly, Graeber begins by saying, “ I don’t actually know all that much about the history of anarchist political theory….I’m not a scholar of anarchism in any sense; I’m a scholar who subscribes to anarchist principles and occasionally acts on them….I’ve largely avoided the books .” (7) This is demonstrated by his conversation, which frequently cites various philosophers and anthropologists but rarely any anarchists. This may lead to errors. For example, he states, “ anarchism…recognized women’s liberation as important from the start. ” (40) Actually, the first person to call himself an “anarchist” was P.J. Proudhon. He was an extreme, almost pathological, believer in women’s inferiority (also a homophobe). This misogyny had a bad influence on the French anarchist and workers’ movements for a long time. Over time European anarchists were to move beyond this to a feminist perspective. (This is certainly not to deny that Proudhon made major contributions otherwise. As Graeber points out, “ Anarchism is very different from Marxism, after all; it’s not driven by heroic thinkers .”) (8) Graeber’s overall perspective rejects both atomistic individualism and totalitarian collectivism for a focus on dialogue. “ Twentieth century political theory has tended to pose the individual versus society…the individual mind versus some kind of collective consciousness….The dialogic approach suggests that most of the really important action takes place somewhere in between: in conversation or deliberation. ” (10) “ Dialogue…[results in the] emergence of thoughts that no individual would have been able to have by themselves, which is ultimately what anarchy too is about…. ” (204) This is a supremely important insight. A dialogical conception of anarchy leads to a radical, participatory, conception of democracy—in which collective decisions are directly made through dialogue in face-to-face groups. “ Democracy is now seen to be largely incompatible with the state. ” (38) This is a controversial opinion among anarchists. Many reject “democracy” because they see it as the ideological rationalization used by the capitalist “representative” state. Graeber discusses how “democracy” came to be used as a justification for the state, even though it had historically been condemned by elite thinkers as “mob rule.” However, many anarchists who reject “democracy” do in fact act in democratic ways, calling this “self-organization” or “autogestion.” “ A lot of people who call themselves democrats don’t seem much interested in the practice (at least as I’d define it); a lot of people who live by the practice don’t call themselves democrats. ” (14) While committed to anarchism, Graeber would agree with Daniel Guerin that anarchism and Marxism may be compatible in certain ways. “ Marxism and anarchism are potentially reconcilable…since if Marxism is a mode of theoretical analysis, and anarchism an ethics of practice, there’s really no reason you can’t subscribe to both .” (15) However, “ while Marx ran circles around Bakunin theoretically, it was Bakunin’s predictions that all came true. ” (16) There is much truth in these sentences, but it is too simplistic. Marx was not only a theoretician and Bakunin was not only an activist. If Bakunin was limited only to “ an ethics of practice ,” how did he manage to out-predict Marx about the dire results of Marx’s strategy of the workers’ taking state powe…
