---
title: "Eight Men Buried Alive"
author: "Industrial Workers of the World"
date: "2015"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/industrial-workers-of-the-world-general-defense-committee-eight-men-buried-alive"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The Centralia Case calls to every decent man and woman in the state of Washington to act quickly"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "industrial-workers-of-the-world-general-defense-committee-eight-men-buried-alive.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/industrial-workers-of-the-world-general-defense-committee-eight-men-buried-alive.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       INCONTROVERTIBLE EVIDENCE        Years of Struggle in the Lumber Woods        Sawmill Workers Long Exploited        A.F. of L. Fails to Organize Woodsmen        Everett Employers Break Wage Promise        Sheriff and Mob Brutalize Industrialists        Eleven I.W.W. Murdered; Nobody Punished        Exile, Torture and Death for Unionists        Five Die in Jail While Awaiting Trial          Memorial Day Parade Raids One Hall          Blind Newspaper Seller Is Deported        Hubbard Appoints Secret Committee        Protection Asked of Police and Public        Marcher Admits Soldiers Attacked First        Mob Controls Town for Nine Days        Verdict Is Contradiction of Charge        Judge Delivers Eulogy of Slain Men        Right of Self-Defense Is Clear        Two Saw Grimm in Doorway of Hall        But There Was No Reviewing Stand        “I Offered to Lead a Raid--”        Two Men Carry Ropes in the Parade        Court Ignores Evidence About Mob Leader        “I’ll Hang Every One of Them.”        Jurors Admit They Were Terrorized        Presence of Troops Big Factor        Defense Searches For Movie Camera-Man        WHAT YOU CAN DO TO HELP Eight Men Buried Alive The Centralia Case calls to every decent man and woman in the state of Washington to act quickly Published by The General Defense Committee 1001 West Madison Street, Chicago, Ill. Printed in the U.S.A. — 1924 (original printed by union labor) Every statement in these pages can be backed up by documentary evidence. The background of the Centralia case, stretching across long years, is first portrayed, and the circumstances which led inevitably to the Armistice Day rioting in 1919 are clearly and dispassionately related; then comes the story of the evidence admitted or suppressed during the trial of the industrialists [industrial workers] who defended their hall against a mob; and lastly the affidavits of six jurors who admit that they were terrorized into returning a verdict of guilty. On the final page you are told what you can do to set the Centralia victims free. We must work against herculean forces which seek to keep these men in prison. According to its own annual report, the Northwest Logging Operators’ Association, organized in May, 1923, set aside $55,000 for its first year’s fight to crush the I.W.W. And the Federated Industries of Washington is admittedly active in efforts to disbar Elmer Stuart Smith, the young attorney who was tried with the Centralia unionists and acquitted. These two organizations operate a blacklist against all I.W.W. members, having devised an elaborate card index system to get around the state law which prohibits blacklisting of workingmen. If you want more information about the I.W.W. and the lumber monopoly, read the following: The I.W.W.; A Study of American Syndicalism, by Paul F. Brissenden. New York: Longmans, Green and Company. 1920. The Casual Laborer, by Carleton Parker. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Howe. 1920. An American Idyll, by Cornelia Parker. Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press. 1919. The Lumber Industry, Part 1, Standing Timber, by Herbert Knox Smith, U.S. Commissioner of Corporations. Washington: Bureau of Corporations, U.S. Department of Commerce and Labor. 1911. The Lumber Industry and Its Workers. Chicago: Industrial Workers of The World, 1001 West Madison Street. 1923. Price 25 cents. EIGHT MEN BURIED ALIVE Eight industrial workingmen are buried behind iron bars and stone walls in the state of Washington for a crime they never committed. They are in prison at Walla Walla. Seven of them were sentenced to serve from25 to 40 years, and one was found insane, but for some inexplicable reason he also was placed in the penitentiary. They were tried in 1920 for the alleged murder of Lieut. Warren Grimm and the seven were convicted. But actually none of them committed any crime. They were accused and found guilty solely because they were members of the I.W.W. and had fought against the exploitation policies of the Pu…
