---
title: "The Creation of Disaster"
author: "Kevin Tucker"
date: "2009"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-tucker-the-creation-of-disaster"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This essay will appear in species traitor 1. It was also written before the earthquake in Seattle, which is ironic in a strange way, but it just makes it all make more sense Retrieved on February 20th, 2009 from www.insurgentdesire.org.uk"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-tucker-the-creation-of-disaster.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-tucker-the-creation-of-disaster.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The balance of nature, and our attempts to refuse it.        Polluting the Web of Life.        The disaster of dependency.        The failure of control.        The faulty foundations of civilization.        Learning lessons from destruction. One can’t help but feel remorse for the thousands of victims involved in the massive earthquakes that recently hit India. Despite one’s political views, the kind of hardships many have had to endure because of this incident, has granted a good deal of sympathy from those aware of the situation. But what are the lessons being learned? Is the aid sent with the notion that it will help rebuild the areas that have been struck, or will it go to help prevent. Either way, the most likely outcome will be that the tragedy will go down in history books and the dead mourned, but India will rebuild, and business will go on once again. That is till the next earthquake or other ‘natural disaster’ strikes. This wouldn’t be unlikely, as it is how every other major ‘disaster’ of recent times has been treated. This isn’t the first or last incident of this caliber and type to occur, so what do we do? We rebuild and move on, with more effort and passion than before, to help hold up the impossible ideal that we can sustain our way of life. It is becoming more and more necessary that we re-assess this reoccurring situation. The mentality that no matter what cards nature deals us (even if those cards are dealt by global warming or underground testing of nuclear arms or some other ‘necessary evil of progress’), we will endure, and each time with more vigor and endurance. Every time a ‘disaster’ of this type occurs, we treat it as if nature has done us wrong. In many cases, we don’t even offer more than sympathy and aid to those who suffered, primarily out of joy that it wasn’t us who were forced to endure such hardships. Either way we turn a blind eye to the reality of the issue: that nature acts in cycles that we cannot possibly understand. The cycles of nature are completely different than any human cycle that has been created (aside from the basic birth to death cycles, which as much as we try to, we can not change.). The cycles of nature are built upon a balance, which has kept the natural world functioning for its millions of years of existence. They are unpredictable and chaotic. They will never come and go in the same way, or even have the same individual effects. The only thing they will do for sure is catalyze the life cycles of all living things. This is what provides the air we breathe, the food we eat, the water we drink, and everything else that allows life to occur on this planet. Is it disaster? No, disaster entails destruction in a very negative sense. It implies misfortune and death (of course, this itself provides insight to the inner functions of civilized-conquering-rational thought). Is a life cycle something destructive? Of course it is not. There may be death involved in it, but it is not the end of life (as our languages would imply), but the flourishing of life. Nature will replace and renew itself; this is essential to life (the outlook that death is something to be mourned is another part of our self-removal from the whole of nature.). So how does this become a ‘disaster’? It’s obvious that there is misery involved when things like the earthquake in India, massive floods, ravaging fires, and so on, but why is this? Did the earth in India suddenly open up and devour thousands of bodies or did the movement of the crust (a natural cycle of ecological sustainability) cause the foundations of the unsustainable, above ground structures to be off set, and in most cases, to the point of collapse? Despite our growing up with science fiction and outrageous stories of action and adventure, we know that the Earth does not open up and swallow thousands of lives when an earthquake hits. So the obvious problem is that the misery is caused by the fact that our towering cities cannot take the cy…
