---
title: "Anarchism, Ireland and the WSM"
author: "Kevin Doyle"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-anarchism-ireland-and-the-wsm"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 11th December 2021 from kfdoyle.wordpress.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "kevin-doyle-anarchism-ireland-and-the-wsm.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-doyle-anarchism-ireland-and-the-wsm.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       NOT GETTING PERSONAL        THE WSM AND ANARCHISM        FIGHTING THE LAST WAR        CORK WSM        CAN YOU SEE MY POINT?        WAKE UP COMRADE, YOU ARE ENTERING…        THE BABY, THE BATHWATER OR BOTH?        DEAR MAHKNO, I AM WRITING TO …        A TOUCH OF HARRY POTTER’S WAND        CONCLUDING COMMENTS The current crisis in Irish society has taken many of us by surprise. The scale of the social and economic reversal is one thing, but the manner in which the establishment has turned what was an unpredictable economic meltdown into a serious position of advantage has also been disconcerting. Not surprisingly people have been throwing their hands in the air and wondering aloud about ‘what it will take’ before we all get up off our knees. The not inconsiderable demoralisation that has resulted has found expression in claims that the ‘left’ is in crisis. The anarchist movement has not of course remained immune from any of this. The lack of any serious fight back has seriously undermined morale. Moreover the scale of this and the profound implications of what it indicates have exposed serious weaknesses in our own analysis and practice. While this is sobering and could be turned to some advantage, there is a developing sense also that there is no longer a clear understanding about how to move forward. I believe this, in part, is to do with the poor state of the WSM as we entered this crisis. It is one thing to face into a storm with a readied ship, it is another entirely to look up and see that your sails are in tatters. The WSM, the main anarchist organisation in Ireland, then is at the heart of much of the paralysis. It continues to limp on in this difficult climate and it continues to do some things well – a fact that reflects hugely on the commitment of its members. But the recent Household and Water Tax Campaign has also shown that the organisation has become close to irrelevant in terms of its ability to influence the business end of radical politics. This is not a place where anyone of us ever expected to be. While some – for their own reasons – are careful to downplay the crisis, the prognosis, I believe, will not improve until the past is discussed, examined and faced up. To that end this contribution is added. Two significant analyses on the state of the WSM have so far emerged. The WSM and Anarchism : A Political Analysis [1] (referred herein as the WSM and Anarchism ) was written by JoB. Although containing some historical background, WSM and Anarchism is largely concerned with period of the 00s, and the experience and politics of the WSM in that time. Since it ends fairly precipitously with a rejection of anarchism – the author left the WSM prior to writing WSM and Anarchism – it has suffered the fate of many a heretical document and been cast aside quite quickly by some. Nevertheless it contains many valid points and has been vital in generating awareness of what the divisions that arose in the WSM in the 00s amounted to. The WSM and Fighting The Last War [2] (herein Fighting The Last War ) was written by AnF and is titled a reply to WSM and Anarchism . Extremely long, it is in part an item by item ‘this is why you are wrong and I was right’ exposition on the various points covered by WSM and Anarchism . It is not clear if Fighting The Last War was initially written as an official WSM response to WSM and Anarchism but to my knowledge it has not; that certainly is positive. However it is important to note too that Fighting the Last War is more than a reply to the WSM and Anarchism . It moves on to address the general crisis now facing the left (anarchism in particular) suggesting that the current political basis for WSM activity (and for political activity in general) is no longer sound. As a result it concludes with an exhortation for the creation of a new model of revolutionary organisation. A note before continuing on. It is not my intention here to attempt cover both documents in their totality. There is…
