---
title: "1938–1956: The tragedy of Karaganda"
author: "Wayne Foster"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-foster-1938-1956-the-tragedy-of-karaganda"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 25th February 2021 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "wayne-foster-1938-1956-the-tragedy-of-karaganda.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/wayne-foster-1938-1956-the-tragedy-of-karaganda.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Part 1 – A Chronological Account in English of the Incarceration of CNT Members and other Spanish Anti-Fascists in the Soviet Union at the end of the Spanish Civil War          1.1 Background          1.2 1939–1941: Detention and Imprisonment          1.3 1941–1942: Transit Prison and Labour Camps          1.4 1942–1948: Karaganda          1.5 The Solidarity Campaign          1.6 The Soviet Response          1.7 1949–1953          1.8 Release        Part 2 – Discussion of Matters Arising from the Above Chronology          2.1 The Mortality Rate          2.2 Resistance          2.3 The Karaganda Revolts of 1952          2.4 The Norilsk Rebellion of 1953          2.5 Conclusion        3. References Abstract: In March 1939, Republican soldiers who had been training as aviation pilots were stranded in the USSR along with the sailors of several vessels from the Spanish merchant navy. They were prevented from leaving and in 1941 were arrested and sent to Novosibirsk Transit Prison. Also detained were several civilians who had been working with children evacuated from the Civil War. In 1942 the three groups were brought together in an agricultural labour camp in Kazakhstan, where eight Spaniards fathered children with Austrian prisoners. They remained there until 1948 when, partly due to a vigorous solidarity campaign fought by exiled Spanish anarchists on their behalf, they were transferred to a camp near Odessa. 18 prisoners signed documents accepting Soviet citizenship and were released to work in the region around the Black Sea. The rest remained in the Gulag system until 1954 or 1956. Towards the end of their imprisonment they were held with Spanish fascists who had been captured during WWII while fighting in the Blue Division. In addition to those Spanish anti-fascists who went missing or died in the first years of detention, out of 66 anti-fascists known to have been in Kazakhstan on the 1 st January 1943, 11 died in Soviet camps. That the majority survived can be attributed in part to the togetherness and solidarity they maintained in captivity, evident in their work stoppages and hunger strikes [1] . The following abbreviations are used in the text: CNT (Confederación Nacional de Trabajo) – Anarchist influenced revolutionary syndicalist trade union in Spain FAI (Federación Anarquista Ibérica) – Anarchist Federation of Iberia FEDIP (Federación Española de Deportados e Internados Politicos) – a group established in France at the end of WWII, it campaigned on behalf of Spanish political prisoners and refugees. IzR (Izquierda Republicana) – Republican Left, formed 1934 JCI (Juventud Communista Ibérica) – The youth organisation of the POUM (see below) JSU (Juventudes Socialistas Unificadas) – United Socialist and Communist youth movement LIC Information supplied by Dr. Luiza Iordache Cârstea, author of the thesis, ‘La historia de los republicanos españoles en los campos de concentración soviéticos,’ Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, June 2007, (486p) MLE (Movimiento Libertario Español) – The Spanish Libertarian Movement combining the CNT, FAI and the Federación Ibérica de Juventudes Libertarias (the anarchist youth) MVD (Ministerstvo Vnutrennikh Del) – Soviet Ministry of Internal Affairs NKVD (Narodnyi Komissariat Unutrennikh Del) – Soviet secret police during the 1930s and 40s. OUN (Organizatsiya Ukrainskikh Natsionalistov) – Ukranian Nationalists who fought against the Soviet Army during and after WWII. PCE (Partido Communista Español) – Spanish Communist Party PNV (Partido Nacionalista Vasco) – Basque nationalists POUM (Partido Obrero de Unificación Marxista) – Dissident Trotskyist Communists PSUC (Partido Socialista Unificat de Catalunya) – Combined Socialist and Communist Parties of Catalonia UGT (Unión General de Trabajadores) – Reformist socialist Trade Union Few historical episodes have been as extensively discussed as the Spanish Civil War, but there has been a conspicuous silence regarding the fate of those mili…
