---
title: "‘Fix It or Nix It?’ The anti-globalisation movement"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-fix-it-or-nix-it-the-anti-globalisation-movement"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Review of J. Brecher, T. Costello and B. Smith, 2000, ‘Globalisation from Below: the power of solidarity’"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-fix-it-or-nix-it-the-anti-globalisation-movement.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-fix-it-or-nix-it-the-anti-globalisation-movement.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The anti-globalization movement        Responses to the movement        Beyond globalisation        A multi-class movement        A ‘common programme’        Third world unity?        The role of the state        Conclusion The enormous upsurge of protest against the multilateral institutions that design and implement capitalist globalisation has taken many by surprise. The new movement against neo-liberalism — and, in particular, the role of anarchist ‘black blocs’ — burst onto the public consciousness with the November 1999 protests in Seattle, United States, against the World Trade Organisation (WTO). The new movement, dubbed ‘anticapitalist’ or ‘anti-globalisation’, has since organised a range of high profile actions. These include ‘S26’ against the International Monetary Fund (IMF) summit in Prague, September 2000, and the mass action against the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)meeting in Quebec, May 2001. In South Africa, a range of broadly anticapitalist forces has combined as the Antiprivatisation Forums of Johannesburg and Cape Town. The union movement has · been, with few exceptions, entirely absent from this new left. Responses to the anti-globalisation movement have varied. On the far right, papers such as the Executive Intelligence Review have attacked the protestors as ‘proto-terrorists’. Other rightists have strongly supported the anti-globalisation movement. They see it as a way to further neo-fascist agendas of stronger national autonomy, economic protectionism, the exclusion of immigrants, and withdrawal from world affairs and so-called world government. The left has been equally divided in response.The two main left alternatives to capitalist globalisation may be defined as the ‘fix it’ and the ‘nix it’ approaches. Divisions at the World Social Forum at Porto Allegre, Brazil, in January 2001, reflected these two approaches.This forum intended to work out a way forward for the newanti-globalisation movement. The ‘fix it’ position advocates the reform of global capitalism and its institutions, such as the IMF, WTO and United Nations.The ‘fix it’ camp believes these institutions can be transformed to defend the interests of labour and the ‘third’ world. Once transformed, they can provide progressive global governance in such forms as the enforcement of social clauses in world trade agreements. The more radical ‘nix it’ position, championed by anarchists and libertarians, stands for the abolition of capitalism and its replacement by a humane, planned, selfmanaged, stateless, global economy.The ‘nix it’ position argues that the IMF, WTO and other multilateral structures are inherently anti-working class. Hence, it should be abolished through class struggle. Brecher, Costello and Smith’s book Globalization from below is a perfect example of the ‘fix it’ approach, and demonstrates all the flaws and confused thinking in this approach. The authors devote a large part of the book to discussing the negative impacts of capitalist globalisation. Examples include the rapid growth of inequality between and within countries, union bashing, casualisation of the workforce, mass retrenchments, cuts in social spending, economic imperialism and instability, and environmental destruction.A second central theme is a discussion of the tactics needed to build a powerful coalition, a ‘globalisation from below’, that can shape the process of capitalist globalisation. These criticisms of capitalist globalisation, and proposed tactics for building a movement for ‘globalisation from below’, are not very controversial and many progressives would accept them. Unlike Thabo Mbeki, most of the left is, at least, clear that capitalist globalisation results in increased working class poverty. They would also support the need for a self-managed coalition against capitalist globalisation that recognises diversity, unites people across borders and across the ‘first’ and”third worlds’, and mobilises on the streets. When it comes to bui…
