---
title: "Communism Unmasked"
author: "Abba Gordin"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/abba-gordin-communism-unmasked"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on January 2, 2025 from https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.$b591661"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "abba-gordin-communism-unmasked.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/abba-gordin-communism-unmasked.epub"
    hosted: false
---

   Book One: Communism ― Emerging Master-Class Ideology      I. MARXISM AND MARXIANITY        1. The Double-Faced Mask        2.“Exploitation” Without an Historical Time-Limit          A. Topsy-Turvy Economy          B. Brahmana as the Prototype of the Proletarian        3. Class - Struggle Horizontal or Vertical        4. Class Struggle as Old as History        5. Dishistorization of History        6. Marxism and the Lumpen-Proletariat.        7. Communist Eschatology.        8. Conclusion      II. MARXISM-VULGAR OR PSEUDO-SCIENTIFIC        1. Numbers        2. Association and Associators        3. Natural Non-Selection.        4. Large-Scale Production.        5. Erroneous Analogies      III. THE PERIOD OF AGITATION        1. The False Hope and the False Alarm          A. False Hope          B. False Alarm        2. Discontentment and Its Vitalization.        3. Words and Deeds.        4. The Bourgeoisie and the Politico-Economic Organisateurs Passing Through Two Periods.    Book Two: Communism Is Not “Socialism”; It Is “Politicalism”      I. OBJECTIVE AIMS OF THE MARXIAN COMMUNISTS        1. Two In One.        2. Marxism-Leninism As A Plan.        3. Anarchy Of Production.        4. Marxism As Politicalism.        5. Industrial Feudalism And Industrial Democracy.        6. Marxism and the Labor Problem.        7. Communist Leadership.        8. Marxism Objectively Considered.        9. Marxism And The Most Advanced Class.      II. COMMUNISM AND EXPLOITATION        1. The Organisateurs as “Exploiters”.        2. Profit Unessential For “Exploitation”.        3. "Exploitation " Not Conditioned By Ownership .        4. "Exploitation” Unified.        5. Imposed Overproduction And Underconsumption        6. Intensification Of “Exploitation”.        7. Bukharin On “Exploitation”.        8. Lenin On “Exploitation”        9. Tugan Baranovsky On “Exploitation”.        10.“Exploitation” Under Communism.      III. COMMUNISM, OR STATISM.        1. State Or Society.        2. Producers Or “Socializers”.        3. Seizure Of The State By The Proletariat.      IV. COMMUNISM OR INTERINDIVIDUALISM AND INTER-CLASSISM        1. Preliminary Remarks.        2. Community or Interindividual Association.        3. Contradiction Between Production And Appropriation.        4. The One And The Many.        5. Laissez Faire As Separation Of Economics From Politics.        6. Private And Public.        7. Size: Social or Corporational.        8. Political-Social or Economic Interindividual.        9. Social or Interindividual Relation.      V. COMMUNISM-COLLECTIVISM OR INTER-PRIVATISM.        1. Absence of Economic Guarantees.        2. Bourgeois Property an Invention of Marx.        3. Marxism as Anti-Laborism.        4. Interindividual Ownership.        5. The Primitive and the Modern Man.        6. Capital as an Embodiment of an Interclass Relation.        7. Dialectics.        8. Splitting the Ranks of Labor.      VI. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OR POLITICAL STAMPEDE.        1. Competition as a Problem of Capital.        2. The Size of the Economic “Society”.        3. An Economic Answer to an Economic Question.        4. Civil Militarism Versus Industrialism.        5. From Polycapitalism to Monocapitalism – Not Politicalism.      VII. ETHICS AND POLITICS.        1. Ethical and Political Concepts and Their Interaction.        2. Communism as a Political Movement Is Antithetic To Communism as a Moral Teaching.          OTHER BOOKS BY ABBA GORDIN MARXISM AS A TEACHING is composed of two elements. One is effervescent, volatile. The other is, by comparison, solid matter, sound and sane judgment, if overstatements made by it are overlooked, or, rather understood and, therefore, forgiven. One part of Marxism, if we may say so, represents oriental ardor, revivalistic fervor, emotionally volcanic eruptions of condemnation and, as a counter-balance, geyser-like gushings of salvation. This part we shall call “Marxianity”. It is an inheritance that fell to his lot, …
