---
title: "Background to Zimbabwe and Structural Adjustment"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-background-to-zimbabwe-and-structural-adjustment"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Unpublished, commissioned by Khanya College. Retrieved on 12th September 2021 from lucienvanderwalt.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-background-to-zimbabwe-and-structural-adjustment.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-background-to-zimbabwe-and-structural-adjustment.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Zimbabwe today        1980: Independence in Zimbabwe        The 1980 elections        Government policy in the 1980s        The drive towards a one-party State        The interventionist capitalist state        Was ZANU “socialist”?        The 1980–1982 strike wave        ZANU versus the unions        Resistance in the 1980s        Structural adjustment in Zimbabwe        Growing economic problems in the late 1980s        The adoption of the Economic Structural Adjustment Programme (ESAP)        The social impact of ESAP        Popular resistance to ESAP        The organised working class flexes its muscles        The ZCTU versus ZANU        The ZCTU launches a workers party        The Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) The text below was written in 1999 for a proposed c0-authored (but never published, for various reasons) booklet in the Khanya College “Economic Literacy Series.” It examines Zimbabwe in the 1980s and 1990s, stressing the class struggles and rebellions faced by the ZANU-PF regime of Robert Mugabe, and the regime’s (these days, well known) pattern of repression, corruption and elite rule. Those enamored of the Mugabe regime’s current revolutionary posturing may not be aware that its history of repressing unions, students and peasants, while enriching ZANU-PF “cadre” and their allies, goes back to 1980. Khanya College, then on Kerk Street, Johannesburg, was and is a left NGO involved in popular education: you can visit their site here. Founded in 1986, it was one the survivors of the rich 1970s and 1980s left-educational NGOs and LSO (Labour Service Organisations) milieu. Khanya was soon to move into a space at the Workers Library and Museum, in Newtown, Johannesburg, where I was increasingly based. The Workers Library and Museum, founded in 1998, was another survivor, an LSO where I was active from around 1998 to 2003: see here. What Khanya could do, and the Workers Library could not do, was publish . In 1997, Khanya produced Debating GEAR , which Economic Literacy Series no.1; , for 1998, there was May Day: facing the challenges of globalisation , a version ofc which (slightly different to the published one) is online here; in 2000, no. 3 of the Economic Literacy Series appeared, by far the best, Gear and Housing in South Africa. Zimbabwe would fit in, because its experience in the 1990s looked like presenting many lessons for South Africa, where the neo-liberal GEAR policy was adopted in 1997 by the state led by the African National Congress (ANC) – to the shock of the unions and others. The next section of this booklet will examine how Structural Adjustment has impacted on a neighbouring country: Zimbabwe. But first it is necessary to provide some background on Zimbabwe’s history and social structure. In 1997, Zimbabwe had a population of around 11 million people. The country is quite industrialised, with industry contributing more than third of total economic output. Industry contributed 35,3% of Gross Domestic Product in 1993. This means that Zimbabwe is one of the most industrialised countries in Africa, although it is not as industrialised as South Africa. Agriculture contributed 18,3% and services 46,4%. However, a large proportion of the workforce is outside the industrial sector. Agriculture employs 70% of the workforce of 4,2 million, either as small peasant farmers or as labourers on commercial farms. South Africa is Zimbabwe’s major trading partner, and South African companies play a central role in the Zimbabwean economy. In the 1980s, Anglo-American was reported to the biggest single private company in Zimbabwe. Other South African companies involved in Zimbabwe include Barlow Rand, CNA and SA Breweries. Zimbabwe became an independent state in 1980. This followed a 15- year armed struggle against the apartheid-style Rhodesian government of Ian Smith, a war that cost 30,000 lives. The liberation war, or “Chimurenga”, in Zimbabwe was based in the countryside, and in particular in the homela…
