---
title: "Economising with reality"
author: "Iain McKay"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-economising-with-reality"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Why editorials in the Economist are ideologically driven, its support for Bush’s plan to privatise social security being just one example"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarcho-economising-with-reality.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarcho-economising-with-reality.epub"
    hosted: false
---

The Economist magazine is always good for a laugh. I remember reading an issue where it reviewed the 20 th century and, in the process, asserted that that century had proved Marx wrong. It argued that the idea that capitalism was marked by two classes, a capitalist class and a working class, and that these classes would become polarised with one extremely wealthy and the other much poorer had been refuted. They explicitly pointed to America, stating that US workers would find Marx’s comments hard to believe. Yet in the very same issue they presented statistics which showed that inequality had increased massively in the US over the last 30 years and that, more over, the average US worker has seen their real wages stagnate: in 2000 they earned less in real terms than they did in 1973. Another example occurred post-Seattle. In response to the protests, it produced a leader entitled “The Case for Globalisation.” In it they asked “how convincing is it to blame accelerating globalisation for the migration of jobs from North to South, when America has an unemployment rate of less than 4% and real wages are growing right across the spectrum?!” The same issue had a graph that showed the reality of the situation. Between 1979 and 1996, the real median weekly earnings for High school drop-outs and High-school graduates dropped by 30% and 18% respectively. College graduates’ earnings were up by about 9%, to a wage unchanged for 10 years. So, the magazine concentrated on the last 4 years out of the 20! And the real wage growth in this four year period? Approximately a 2% rise for drop-outs, 4% for high-school graduates and 6% for college graduates. And it complained about “a mere rabble of exuberant irrationalists on the streets” ! Clearly, the editorial writers did not read their own journal otherwise they would not be auto-refuting themselves. The facts it presents do not always point to the logical conclusion the magazine makes. The editorial or the last paragraph in an article will always be, no matter what, a paean to free market liberalism. So the journalists write one story, the sub-editors add the “free market” stance to the final paragraph and the slant of the article while the editorials expound on the benefits of the market, regardless of the facts. In this, it is a lot like a free -market version of Pravada. The February 10 th issue of the magazine presented another example of its doublethink approach to reporting. In “America’s pension challenge,” the magazine argues that Bush’s privatisation proposal might be okay as long as he listens to criticism and changes it in nearly every way. This in spite of knowing full well this is something he will not do having repeatedly editorialised about this facet of Bush’s personality over the past four years. So, in other words, the article states that everything about the Bush Social Security reform plan is wonderful except for, well, pretty much everything about the plan. The last paragraph of the article shows why the magazine took this schizophrenic position. It notes that the changes it suggests “are the ones that will actually stop Social Security going bust” and so “in that regard, Mr Bush’s new retirement accounts are no help.” However, “this misses the point.” The real issue is ideological, namely: “Giving people greater control of their savings is desirable in itself: that is why private accounts deserve their place in this reform. It is wrong that in the world’s most advanced economy so many retirees should rely so heavily on the state. That idea is at the heart of Mr Bush’s ‘ownership society’ — and it is worth supporting.” In other words, the Economist admits that there is no real crisis, that the details of Bush’s plan are wrong and, if fixed, would rescue Social Security anyway. But here is the kicker, the magazine supports the plan for the same reason George Bush does: because of their ideological prejudices. Of courser, if Bush’s fatally flawed plan does become law it will…
