---
title: "Cuba: socialist paradise or Castro’s fiefdom?"
author: "Dermot Sreenan"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dermot-sreenan-cuba-socialist-paradise-or-castro-s-fiefdom"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From Workers Solidarity No. 40 — Autumn 1993. Retrieved on 12th October 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "dermot-sreenan-cuba-socialist-paradise-or-castro-s-fiefdom.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dermot-sreenan-cuba-socialist-paradise-or-castro-s-fiefdom.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Batista        Sierra Maestra years        The Revolution        Yesterday’s Nationalism — Today’s Socialism        Cuba : Castro’s Playground        What Now? ”..the major event of the twentieth century has been the abandonment of the values of liberty on the part of the revolutionary movement, the weakening of Libertarian Socialism, vis-a-vis Caesarist and militaristic Socialism. Since then, a great hope has disappeared from the world to be replaced by a deep sense of emptiness in the hearts of all who yearn for Freedom....” — Albert Camus, ‘Neither Victims nor Executioners’ As Camus says, a deep sense of emptiness is felt by all those who wish for a revolution leading to the creation of a society which is classless and truly socialist. As the history of the 20 th century has unfolded we have witnessed the repeated failure of vanguards and leaders to create the society for which the true-hearted revolutionaries have fought and died. Not so long ago most of the left held up the Soviet Union as an example of Socialism or something with some socialist features. As the Eastern Bloc crumbled and the true horrors of sick states like Ceaucescu’s Romania were exposed Cuba became the new Mecca for the left. What we find there is unfortunate and there is little to inspire us in the country which has had Fidel Castro at the wheel of power for over 30 years. Cuba, about 90 miles off the coast of North America, is the largest of the Caribbean islands. The social services are in a far better condition than they are in other Latin American countries. Virtually every Cuban under the age of 30 can read and write. But the cost of these benefits is high for the working class who have never been in the saddle of power in Cuba. This is not their role as the doting Father looks after their interests. While the figures about literacy and health are good there are a number of statistics which aren’t so impressive. One Cuban in every 340 is in prison. There are 400 political prisoners. Around 50% of the Cuban male population are known to the police or have criminal records. The Cuban police force regularly carry revolvers, tear gas and electric truncheons. The crime rate itself is very low, so the equipment of the police and the jail population would seem to indicate a state that is repressive in it’s dealings with the people. To understand how Cuba functions now, why it developed the way it did and why socialism was never on Castro’s menu, we must look at the origins and path of the revolution. Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar had taken control of Cuba in a military coup called the ‘sergeants revolt’ on September 4 th 1933. He promoted himself to the position of Commander in Chief of the armed forces and comfortably ruled through a host of puppet presidents. Batista contested and lost the presidency 1944, after which he exited to Florida with millions from the small country’s coffers. He returned to power in a coup d’état in 1952, three months prior to the presidential elections. An interesting point to note is the cordial relationship between Batista and the Cuban Communist Party. They were allowed to function openly and supported Batista’s candidates in the 1940 elections. As their reward they got control of the state controlled trade union, the Cuban Confederation of Labour (CTC-Confederacion de Trabajadores de Cuba). The First Secretary General was Lazaro Pena, a post he would later hold under Fidel Castro. The 26 th of July Movement [Fidel Castro and Che Guevara’s guerrilla organisation] was born out of an attack on the Moncada military barracks in 1953. The attack, though brave, was bungled and failed. The movement really grew during the subsequent trial where Castro successfully gave the impression of the July Movement as being nationalists who would no longer be restrained. The political aspirations of the movement extended no further than “total and definitive social justice” and “absolute and reverent respect” for the 1940 constitution…
