---
title: "An anarcha-feminists’ subjective perspective of anarcha-feminism"
author: "Sofia Hildsdotter"
date: "2011"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sofia-hildsdotter-an-anarcha-feminists-subjective-perspective-of-anarcha-feminism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "translated by ks References: Anarkafeminism, edited by Pia Laskar 1992, Federativs förlag, Stockholm Clash, Newspaper of Resistance in Europe, nr 3/91, Amsterdam — för revolution i vår livstid- ksvensson@hotmail.com Retrieved on 4 March 2011 from www.spunk.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sofia-hildsdotter-an-anarcha-feminists-subjective-perspective-of-anarcha-feminism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sofia-hildsdotter-an-anarcha-feminists-subjective-perspective-of-anarcha-feminism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Anarcha-feminist theory        Organising        Analysis of Power        Our political practice Because anarchism is purported to oppose all usage of power and forms of oppression the term anarcha-feminsim should actually be unnecessary. All anarchists should, if they really meant what they said about being against all forms of oppression, work against, or at least not support, the oppression of women. That’s theoretically. However, our reality is that we are all products of our societal surroundings. It is also a fact that those who find themselves in a hierarchical position of power have a hard time accepting that a hierarchy even exists! Men do not recognise the oppression of women to the same extent or to the same degree that women do. Those who have power and privilege are in addition, often unwilling to relinquish these. Because of these reasons, many male anarchists have not activated themselves in the struggle against the oppression of women and, for these same reasons, it has become necessary for female anarchists to denote themselves as anarcha-feminists. Feminists can be divided into two types, essentialists (difference) or constructionalists (equality). On the one side, essentialist feminists propose that the differences between men and women are based upon the occurrences of nature. On the other side, constructionalist feminists propose that the differences between men and women are a result of societal socialisation. Anarcha-feminists are constructionalists. The norms controlling in which ways men and women should present themselves or how they should interact with each other are regarded as social constructions. In order to change these power-related relationships between the sexes it is therefore, to a large degree, necessary for people to change themselves. This is the logical conclusion of examining how we as individuals are affected by the societal demands placed upon us as men or women. In this perspective, this socialisation pertains to matters ranging from ones choice of profession and clothing to sexual partners. In regards to sexuality we are socialised into heterosexuality, and this is one of feminism’s most complex aspects. Women, as a social group, interact with men, as a social group, in a completely different manner than, for example, in which the working class interacts towards the upper class. This is because many women have intimate relationships with men. During the 1970’s, many radical feminists spent a great deal of time and energy on analysing heterosexuality’s meaning for the oppression of women and many came to the conclusion that women should choose to live as lesbians as a method of revolt against patriarchy. This is a strategy that perceives people as tools used to achieve different goals and does not pay a great deal of attention to individual feelings or situations. However, these analyses have meant a great deal for the development of feminist theory. They concern how we regard heterosexuality’s penetration of society and how this affects relationships between people. Heterosexuality is posed as the “natural” order of things and takes support from such sources as the Bible and Darwinism. If heterosexuality is so “natural”, why the need for all this propaganda? The radical feminists who supported lesbianism as a political strategy used strongly authoritarian arguments. They took upon themselves the role of telling other women how they should regard heterosexual relationships and what they should do with their lives. An anarcha-feminist should contemplate upon these insights in regards to heterosexuality as a societal phenomenon and hopefully reach their own conclusions, such as a libertarian method of struggling against the heterosexual norm without condemning the free choice of individuals. We should always question the idea that heterosexuality is something self-evident and natural and attempt to make truly conscious choices concerning our lives. We should also attempt to fo…
