---
title: "An eco-egoist destruction of species-being and speciesism"
author: "Julian Langer"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/julian-langer-an-eco-egoist-destruction-of-species-being-and-speciesism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://www.nightforestpress.com/post/an-eco-egoist-destruction-of-speciesism-and-species-being"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "julian-langer-an-eco-egoist-destruction-of-species-being-and-speciesism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/julian-langer-an-eco-egoist-destruction-of-species-being-and-speciesism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Species-being        Speciesism        becoming-animal For a union of egoists that includes all living flora, fauna and mineral individuals. The central focus of this essay is nothing short of the complete and utter destruction of human-being and the total liberation of all individual animals. This is in no way an embrace of misanthropy, whose inverted humanism perpetuates the ideology of human -supremacy. Misanthropy is another boring collectivized prejudice, like anti-Semitism, misogyny, ethnic-hatred, homophobia and so on, that reduces individuals to stereotypes; and, in the same way that I look at individuals spewing the rhetoric of "The Great Replacement” with a feeling of disappointment for how utterly stupid they are, misanthropes fill me with a sense of revolt for how shallow and abhorrent their rhetoric is. Here are the meanings of the terms as I use them - this refers first to the conceptualization of an individual animal being an example of a certain type. You might find yourself walking along a beach in Indonesia, see and/or hear an animal who is similar to others, but different , and then moments later be told that this individual is a New Guinean Singing Dog. Before having been conceptualized as a member of this stereotyped form, this was a unique individual, but with the language of species-distinction their individuality is reduced to being a member of the collective body of New Guinean Singing Dog. This term also refers to the social-performance of being-a-member-of-this-species-collective. This performance involves conforming to the stereotypes of the conceptual limits of that species. The species-being of human refers to behaving in ways that are generally considered normal, right, good and socially acceptable. this follows from species-being, since to have any concept of a hierarchy of species that enables a social infrastructure of discriminatory prejudice, we must first have a concept of species-being – one builds upon the foundations of the other. Following from this presupposition, that there exist these distinct species who are actual objects that individuals can Be, speciesism is the logic of the totalitarian ideology which asserts that there is a hierarchy of species . This Master-Species has either the natural and/or God-given right to force other species to work for their species and to exterminate those species which do not conform to their production-narratives. This ideology is most often called agriculture, with other political ideologies (capitalism, socialism, fascism, feudalism, monarchism and so on), built upon this basic operating systemic-design. This is also referred to as “ The Great Chain of Being ”. To rebel against these social structures is to rebel against the entirety of anthropological machinery – all of Leviathan-Reality. Most rebellions are limited to one or another particular anthropological machinery. Anti-capitalists wish to challenge the anthropological machinery of capitalism; anti-socialists wish to challenge the anthropological machinery of socialism; pacifists wish to challenge the anthropological machinery of militarist monopolies of violence; feminists wish to challenge the anthropological machinery of patriarchy. Each particular rebellion seeks to challenge a specific aspect of anthropological machinery, while often retaining all others. To embrace a rebellion against all anthropological machinery is to embrace total liberation, as liberation from every-Thing – every-Thing that constitutes Human-Thing Reality, or a nihilist embrace of no-Thingness. The most obvious ideology of anthropological machinery is transhumanism, which seek to Man-ufacture a Reality through technological construction, providing a road map to build a History with. Within the ideological rhetoric of the many transhumanist philosophers I have encountered, future technologies are positioned as a means to attain the species-being of the anthropologically constructed Reality of the post-human…
