---
title: "Anarchism reloaded"
author: "Uri Gordon"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/uri-gordon-anarchism-reloaded"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Journal of Political Ideologies, Volume 12, 2007. DOI: 10.1080/13569310601095598"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "uri-gordon-anarchism-reloaded.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/uri-gordon-anarchism-reloaded.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Abstract        Introduction        Political culture and ideological content        Struggle against domination        Direct action/prefigurative politics        Diversity and open-endedness        Conclusion The contemporary re-emergence of anarchism on a global scale deserves serious attention from students of ideology. As the defining orientation of prominent activist networks, anarchism today is the principal point of reference for radical social change movements in the North, and represents a mature and complex genre of political expression. This article offers a synchronic and diachronic analysis of contemporary anarchist ideology, based on participant research on large-scale ideological expression in anarchist movement networks. I identify and discuss three major conceptual clusters which mark contemporary anarchism’s stable ideological core: (a) the construction of the concept of ‘domination’ and the active opposition to all its forms and systems, (b) the ethos of direct action as a primary mode of political engagement, both destructive and constructive, and (c) the open-ended, experimental approach to revolutionary visions and strategies, which endorses epistemological pluralism and is strongly grounded in present tense action. From a diachronic point of view, it is argued that these three elements are the product of network- and ideological convergence among ecological, feminist, anti-war and anti-neoliberal movements, associated with the multi-issue politics of alternative globalization and local grassroots politics. The re-emergence of anarchism thus highlights the continuity between movement networks, political culture and ideological articulation, and draws attention to important processes in the life-cycles of ideological formations. The past ten years have seen the full-blown revival of anarchism, as a global social movement and coherent set of political discourses, on a scale and to levels of unity and diversity unseen since the 1930s. From anti-capitalist social centres and eco-feminist communities to raucous street parties and blockades of international summits, anarchist forms of resistance and organizing have been at the heart of the ‘alternative globalization’ movement and have blurred, broken down and reconstructed notions of political action and articulation. Despite this, but perhaps unsurprisingly in view of its traditional marginalization in academia, contemporary anarchism has not received any sustained scholarly attention. This article offers an analysis of present-day anarchist ideology from a movement-driven approach, which stresses a continuity between the culture and life-cycles of social movements and the development of large-scale, grassroots ideological expression. Based on five years of empirical and theoretical research on the political discourse of activist networks, the primary aim of this article is to offer a framework for making sense of the ideological expression that observably prevails in the radical, direct-action end of the alternative globalization and anti-war movement—the site of contemporary anarchism. At the centre of this article is a synchronic analysis of contemporary anarchist ideology, which interprets the ideational framework expressed by widespread trends in the praxis and political language of anarchist activists. These, I argue, display three major conceptual clusters which specify the meanings and relationships between central keywords in anarchist political language, and constitute the ideology’s emergent stable core. The first is the construction of the concept of ‘domination,’ which clarifies how anarchists construct what they object to in society. The second is the cluster ideas associated with direct action and the ethos of ‘prefigurative politics,’ expressing anarchists’ thinking about their methodology for social change. The third is a strongly open-ended conception of politics that is detached from any notion of a post-revolutionary resting point, …
