---
title: "Berlin, You've Hurt Me / Another Berlin is Possible"
author: "Scrappy Capy Distro"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/scrappy-capy-distro-berlin-you-ve-hurt-me-another-berlin-is-possible"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Zine: en.scrappycapydistro.info/zines/berlin-youve-hurt-me-another-berlin-is-possible Retrieved on 6 January 2024 from en.scrappycapydistro.info."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "scrappy-capy-distro-berlin-you-ve-hurt-me-another-berlin-is-possible.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/scrappy-capy-distro-berlin-you-ve-hurt-me-another-berlin-is-possible.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Intro      Berlin, You've Hurt Me        The Unwritten Rules (Emma)        Are My Clothes Not Punk Enough? (Zaz Topping)        Never Enough and Nothing in Between: A queer anarchist Southern European perspective on the Berlin radical leftist scene (Spinne)        The Unseen Nationalism of the Radical Left (Ceylon)        A Community Divided (Naema)      Another Berlin is Possible        “Shut Up and Listen” Doesn’t Work (Emma)        A Perspective From Britain (Zaz Topping)        Something in Between (Spinne)          Open spaces, open minds          Build community, build resistance          Build an emancipatory culture of discussion          Focus on grassroots & groundwork          Go easy on yourself and others        Breaking the Cycle (Ceylon)        A Path to Rapprochement (Naema)      Outro A collection of texts about the hurt we've felt within the radical left and the things we could do to make lasting changes. This is written by and for those of us who hoped to find a home in the radical movement but for whatever reason just weren't quite welcome here. We were promised solidarity and plurality, but often we were met with exclusion. It's hurt us, but also we know how it could be better. This collections of essays from long time residents of this city offers a look into a part of the movement here that is often overlooked. Just like how Berlin is two different cities in the summer and winter—one green and inviting, the other gray and reserved—the radical left movement in Berlin can be a beautiful but harsh place. There’s more squats and Küfas than we can count, there’s something going on every night of the week, and we can spot antifas in every corner of the city. But as vibrant as it can be, it can lead to tremendous hurt and misery. The movement can be welcoming to some but shut out others who are just as deserving of a comradely embrace. Sometimes this feels completely unexpected, but other times we can see it coming because we’re “different” somehow. Maybe we don’t speak German at all (or not that well), maybe we’re from a part of the world with a different radical history or even just different cultural norms. Maybe we’re born and raised here but we don’t fit the stereotype of what a lefty “should” be. The gap between the expectation of acceptance and reality of being pushed away can be jarring, what with all the talk of community and diversity. Being so shut out means we often feel like we have no voice, and this zine aims to provide some outlet, some way of reaching out to communicate something that we’re desperate to express. Collected here are the stories and experiences written by people who—in some way or another—haven’t found the city to be as welcoming as they’d like. All of us have heard the complaints against the scene, cliques, and individuals before, and while those are a necessary part of transforming our relations, this zine also goes beyond ranting. Each author who penned something that spoke of the pains they’ve felt or the shittiness within the movement was asked to write a second text that makes concrete suggestions for how things could be a little kinder or a little less problematic. We stick around because we so very much want to be here, but sometimes trying to be a part of the radical movement here hurts us. We—you, us, everyone else—can be better. Things can be better. We just have to want to change, we have to see what’s wrong, and we have to image what that better world might look like. Hi, I am an anarchaqueerfeminist from russia. In the word anarchaqueerfeminism, all three components are equally important for me. Queerfeminism without anarchism, anarchafeminism without queer—I find all this insufficient and incomplete. In russia, I was involved in longstanding activist projects of the kind that can be called infrastructural if you want to sound smart, but also in direct action. In 2018 I came to Berlin and was full of hopes that my radical spirit would blossom in the activist Ber…
