---
title: "Cybernetic Mommy Milkers"
author: "Lain Iwakura"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lain-iwakura-cybernetic-mommy-milkers"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://feraldistro.noblogs.org/cybernetic-mommy-milkers/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lain-iwakura-cybernetic-mommy-milkers.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lain-iwakura-cybernetic-mommy-milkers.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Works Cited        Excerpts for Context          From Node Theory by Anonymous          From The Will to Empower Democratic Citizens and Other Subjects by Barbara Cruikshank          thebrilliant.org          From Anarchism and Individualism by Georges Palante The way in which relationships are carried out today in the US is ontologically different from how they are in some areas with lower levels of civilization. The Bribri all live very close to each other and are always walking by each others houses; if someone is sitting at their porch and you're walking by and want to chat you say hi and start talking. If they're not at their porch you come by again another day. Since everyone lives so close together they see each other often and don't have to travel far to spend time together. Living close together means they also have more intimate knowledge of each other. Everyone is within a few minutes walk. In the US, friends normally live very far away from each other, often separated by miles within the same town or city. This alone creates a layer of separation, of alienation. The norm is that doing what the Bribri do; walking to someones house to see if they're available to hang out (sitting on their porch) is socially unacceptable. You can't just show up unannounced without texting first; no spontaneous face to face interaction allowed! You have to initiate the interaction through a mediator: the cell phone. You can't just stop by someones house the way the Bribri can, you have to first text/call saying “can I come over?” This removes the possibility of the interaction being initiated through the meat space. Can't start the interaction with eye contact, body language, tone of voice, or sharing physical space. Initiating a physical interaction with a text box is alienating; you're not talking to a person you're talking to a machine feeding you or even better NOT feeding you responses, making the person alien/foreign. When you're texting someone, you're looking at a text box not someones face. A very easy way to make a person feel like an Other is to cut out all other layers of interaction except the written word, which is even more alienating than interacting with someone through speaking. Relationships mediated by cell phones simultaneously feel comforting (the safety of the mother) and make the world outside your phone feel alien. There is a theory that the cell phone acts as a substitute for breast milk in early childhood; a passively received flow. When you use your phone you are “inside” the safety of the maternal realm which could explain the preference for conducting/mediating relationships through phones. The unmediated (face to face) interaction is outside of the protective sphere of the cell phone and therefore potentially dangerous. You can't type and retype your response or wait a few days; you have to respond right then when you're in someones physical space. This makes it easier than ever before to push someone away! You don't even have to say anything! Just leave them on read. They can't stop by and knock on your door to see whats going on because that's taboo! Even if you didn't answer the door you'd still have to deal with the person you're ignoring being physically close which you can completely avoid hiding behind your phone! Try imagining being in a hunter gatherer group and ignoring someone. Impossible! There's no room to go hide from them in, you're outside! You would be forced to say something to them to get them to leave you alone, now you can just stop texting back! Just keep double texting! The more time you spend away from someone the easier it is to reify them; for them to become an abstraction rather than a Unique One. “Only when nothing is said about you and you are merely named, are you recognized as you. As soon as something is said about you, you are only recognized as that thing” To be clear I'm talking specifically about relationships with people who live in the same city/town as you, no…
