---
title: "An Anarcho-Transhumanist FAQ"
author: "William Gillis, Blueshifted"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/blueshifted-an-anarcho-transhumanist-faq"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on November 6, 2022 from http://blueshifted.net/faq/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "blueshifted-an-anarcho-transhumanist-faq.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/blueshifted-an-anarcho-transhumanist-faq.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What’s all this about anarchism and transhumanism?        Doesn’t focusing on the future take away from the present?        What insights does anarcho-transhumanism offer for resistance?        What makes your analysis of technology any less superficial than primitivism’s?        Are you at least opposed to civilization?        Why care when the collapse of civilization is inevitable?        But aren’t green energy and green technologies basically a myth?        Isn’t it just magical thinking to refer to technologies which currently do not exist?        Doesn’t technology mediate our experiences and stop us from living direct lives?        How do anarcho-transhumanists differ from other transhumanists?        How does anarcho-transhumanism differ from Left Accelerationism or Fully Automated Luxury Communism?        Does anarcho-transhumanism intersect with Veganism?        How does anarcho-transhumanism address issues regarding the differently abled and non-neurotypical?        Why the color blue? The term “anarcho-transhumanism” is a relatively recently one, barely mentioned in the 80s, publicly adopted in the early oughts and only really popularized in the last decade. But it represents a current of thought that has been present in anarchist circles and theory since William Godwin [1] , who tied the drive to perpetually improve and perfect our social relations with the drive to perpetually improve and perfect ourselves, our material conditions and our bodies. The idea behind anarcho-transhumanism is a simple one: We should seek to expand our physical freedom just as we seek to expand our social freedom. In this we see ourselves as the logical extension or deepening of anarchism’s existing commitment to maximizing freedom. “Transhumanism” is often shallowly characterized in the media merely in terms of wanting to live literally forever, or wanting to upload one’s mind to a computer, or fantasies of an self-improving AI suddenly arriving and transforming the world to a paradise. And there are a number of individuals attracted to these things. But the only defining precept of transhumanism is that we should have more freedom to change ourselves. In this transhumanism opens up an attack on fixed essentialisms and is part of a wider discourse in feminist and queer theory around cyborg identities and “inhumanisms.” Transhumanism can be seen as either an aggressive critique of humanism, or alternatively as an extension of specific humanist values beyond the arbitrary species category of “human.” Transhumanism demands that we interrogate our desires and values beyond the happenstance of What Is, accepting neither the authority of arbitrary social constructs like gender nor a blind fealty to how our bodies presently function. As one would expect, trans issues have been core to transhumanism from the 1983 “Transhuman Manifesto” on. But transhumanism radically expands on trans liberation to situate it as part of a much wider array of struggles for freedom in the construction and operation of our bodies and surrounding world. Anarcho-transhumanists work on immediately practical projects that give people more control over their bodies like abortion clinics, distributing naloxone, or 3D printing open source prosthetics for children. But we also ask radical questions like why our society is not only okay with the involuntary decay and death of the elderly but moralizes for their perpetual extermination. Life-extension is certainly not the entirety of transhumanism, but it is an important example of a struggle that we’ve opened and shockingly largely fight alone. The notion that an objectively “good life” extends to seventy or a hundred years but no further is clearly arbitrary, and yet such an opinion is both nearly universally held and violently defended. Many early transhumanists were shocked by the bizarreness and brazenness of this response, but it illustrates how people will become staunch proponents of existing injustices for …
