---
title: "Dispatches from Sri Lanka"
author: "Ill Will Editions, Anonymous"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-dispatches-from-sri-lanka"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2022-08-15 from illwill.com/dispatches-from-sri-lanka"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-dispatches-from-sri-lanka.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-dispatches-from-sri-lanka.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Kandy          Ill Will: Can you share your thoughts on the current situation?          Can you tell us a bit about yourselves and your background?          How were you first exposed to anarchist politics?          Is there an anarchist tradition or scene in Sri Lanka? Are there other groups that you are in touch with?          What has your involvement in the protests and at the occupation looked like?          What are some of the debates and different perspectives that emerged in the movement, or within your own group?          What were some of the big turning points in the movement?          What do you see as some of the missed opportunities of the struggle? What have been some of the limits or obstacles that the struggle hasn’t been able to overcome?          What do you expect this next phase of the struggle to look like?          What would it mean to win?          What are the lessons from Sri Lanka for struggles elsewhere?          What can people outside of Sri Lanka do to support?          What do you plan to do now?        Colombo          Can you first just share your thoughts on the current situation?          Can you say a little bit about what the repression looks like right now?          What has your involvement looked like?          What was it like running a food distribution tent?          What were the big turning points of the movement?          What did the lead up to July 9 look like?          Why do you think that many people came on the 9 th ?          Was there a plan to occupy the buildings or did that happen spontaneously?          What happened between July 9 and 13?          What do you see as some of the missed opportunities of the movement so far?          What are the main debates that have happened within the movement?          What role has the left and the various political parties played in the camps and in the movement more generally?          What are some of the debates that took place within your own group?          What were the main limits the movement encountered?          Did those separations become more intense or open rifts at certain points?          Did it feel that people got radicalized over the course of the movement?          What do you think the next phase of the struggle looks like now that Ranil is in power?          What are the lessons from Sri Lanka that might be useful elsewhere?          What do you plan to do now?          Any concluding thoughts? On July 9, hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankans stormed and occupied a number of key government buildings, forcing President Gotabaya to flee the country and resign. This was the climax of a months-long uprising triggered by the worst economic crisis the country has seen since Independence. At the center of the protests is a sprawling occupation in the heart of Colombo, the island country’s capital. When the dust settled, then-Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, a close ally of the Rajapaksa family, was elected president by Parliament on July 20. The following night, the last occupied government building was cleared out by soldiers, along with a part of the main protest camp. In the weeks since a wave of repression has been unleashed, with numerous activists either in jail or in hiding. As we publish this, the police are threatening to evict the occupation. In the aftermath of the July 22 nd raid, Ill Will conducted two interviews with anarchists in Sri Lanka about their views of the uprising: its limits, its horizons, and what the next phase might look like. The first interview was conducted via correspondence with an anarchist and journalist based in Kandy, Sri Lanka’s second largest city. The second was taken in a coffee shop in the suburbs of Colombo with J. and Z., two anarchists involved in a mutual aid distribution tent at the occupation and who have been on the front lines of the protests from early on. Even after Gota’s resignation, Sri Lanka is stuck with the same bunch of politicians. The new Pres…
