---
title: "Claimants groups target Reed Employment"
author: "Anarchist Federation"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-communist-federation-claimants-groups-target-reed-employment"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Direct action from claimants"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarchist-communist-federation-claimants-groups-target-reed-employment.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-communist-federation-claimants-groups-target-reed-employment.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       The current action        This is just the start        Your help is needed        Background        Shady goings-on already Over the weekend of October 23/5 1998, claimants groups throughout England, Scotland and Wales launched a campaign against Reed Employment UK Ltd, which is administering the New Deal in the Hackney & City area of North-East London. The aim of the campaign is to draw public attention to this systematic exploitation of the unemployed for corporate profit; and to deter other, equally greedy, private agencies from sticking their snouts into the trough so cynically prepared for them by the Labour government, and ultimately to force reed to withdraw from the scheme. In towns and cities across the country, claimants & campaigning groups flyposted somewhere between 30 & 50 High Street offices of Reed Employment. These posters were aimed at: Reed managers who, over the next few months, will become aware that they cannot exploit the unemployed for their own benefit Reed staff, who seem to need reminding that their actions- processing claimants for crap, low-paid jobs- are not without consequences, Other employment agencies, who we envisage will receive the same treatment if they follow Reed’s lead, Ordinary members of the public- who either pass Reed Employment offices every day, or who presently use Reed to find work- unaware of what Reed are up to. In the past, companies like Reed’s (who make huge profits off the backs, and the suffering, of the unemployed and others) have been able to console themselves with the thought that actions against them were just one-offs. Not this time. The flyposting is just the start of the campaign. This will be followed up shortly by a campaign of leafleting and other direct actions are being considered. Haringey Solidarity Group & Hackney Claimants are calling this nation-wide campaign against Reed. Claimants & workers in Brighton are also about to launch a campaign against Reed, and we understand the more active members of CPSA (one of the dole workers trade unions) are trying to fight against the continued privatisation of the Employment Service by companies like Reed, from within job centres. We need to hit Reed regularly and at as many of their offices as possible. If actions are just concentrated in North and East London and Brighton, reed will be able to weather the storm. Their profits are large enough that they can soak up a few offices making a loss. The campaign needs the support of groups and individuals throughout the country. Groups within the Groundswell claimants movement have already agreed to back this campaign against Reed’s, but others are welcome & needed. A leaflet has been produced explaining Reed’s involvement in the exploitation of the unemployed/unwaged. Naturally this leaflet also mentions other unsavoury things about Reed’s. We need to get this distributed outside Reed offices-to both passers by, Reed staff, and anybody thinking of using Reed’s to find jobs. If you can help, then contact us for copies. Obviously, if groups want to they can produce and distribute their own leaflets- in fact, this may be better. But, if you ain’t up to producing your own, contact us for copies of ours. Our aim is to hit Reed’s where it hurts- in their pockets- until they realise the only option is to ditch their involvement in the New Deal. Of course we are not suggesting groups or individuals take illegal action- that would be incitement and we know where that can get us! We would ask that groups take whatever action they feel is appropriate in their local area to a) get people to boycott Reed’s and b) force Reed to pull out of the New Deal and any other schemes where they benefit from the suffering of claimants. If there ain’t a Reed’s near you pick on any of the other employment agencies- they all hope to get in on the act and cream off profits from low waged and claimants’ suffering. Reed Employment is one of the UK’s biggest recruitment agencies, with offices …
