---
title: "Anti-capitalism 101"
author: "Steve Klabnik"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/steve-klabnik-anti-capitalism-101"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "http://blog.steveklabnik.com/posts/2012-03-31-anti-capitalism-101"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "steve-klabnik-anti-capitalism-101.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/steve-klabnik-anti-capitalism-101.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Capitalism: an introduction          Unwaged labour          Competition          The State          History          The Future        Class & Class Struggle: an introduction          Class and Capitalism          The Working Class          Class Struggle          Beyond the Workplace          The “Middle Class”          Conclusion People are often surprised to find out that I identify as an anti-capitalist. At least in America, many people see capitalism as inevitable, or even as the way things always were. Unfortunately, there’s so much rhetoric and confusion around this topic that it always takes a long time to break it down. I’d been meaning to write something about this topic, but then I found this really great work called Capitalism, Class, and Class Struggle for (ex) Dummies . I’ve adapted it with my own thoughts and edits below. It in turn is adapted from this essay and this essay from LibCom.org, so if you’d like to see the history, you can read those versions as well. I plan on refining this as things go along, as it’s still a bit jargony in places. Any suggestions are very welcome! At its root, capitalism is an economic system based on three things: wage labour (working for a wage), private ownership of the means of production (things like factories, machinery, farms, and offices), and production for exchange and profit. While some people own means of production, or capital, most of us don’t and so to survive we need to sell our ability to work in return for a wage, or else scrape by on benefits. This first group of people is the capitalist class or “bourgeoisie” in Marxist jargon, and the second group is the working class or “proletariat”. This jargon is only included so that you can make connections to other literature, we’ll stick away from such things later in this text. Capitalism is based on a simple process—money is invested to generate more money. When money functions like this, it functions as capital. For instance, when a company uses its profits to hire more staff or open new premises, and so make more profit, the money here is functioning as capital. As capital increases (or the economy expands), this is called “capital accumulation”, and it’s the driving force of the economy. Those accumulating capital do so better when they can shift costs onto others. If companies can cut costs by not protecting the environment, or by paying sweatshop wages, they will. So catastrophic climate change and widespread poverty are signs of the normal functioning of the system. Furthermore, for money to make more money, more and more things have to be exchangeable for money. Thus the tendency is for everything from everyday items to DNA sequences to carbon dioxide emissions—and, crucially, our ability to work—to become commodified. And it is this last point—the commodification of our creative and productive capacities, our ability to work—which holds the secret to capital accumulation. Money does not turn into more money by magic, but by the work we do every day. In a world where everything is for sale, we all need something to sell in order to buy the things we need. Those of us with nothing to sell except our ability to work have to sell this ability to those who own the factories, offices, etc. And of course, the things we produce at work aren’t ours, they belong to our bosses. Furthermore, because of long hours, productivity improvements etc, we produce much more than necessary to keep us going as workers. The wages we get roughly match the cost of the products necessary to keep us alive and able to work each day (which is why, at the end of each month, our bank balance rarely looks that different to the month before). The difference between the wages we are paid and the value we create is how capital is accumulated, or profit is made. This difference between the wages we are paid and the value we create is called “surplus value”. The extraction of surplus value by employers is the reason we view capitalism as a…
