---
title: "Anarcho-Syndicalism and Anarchism"
author: "Pierre Besnard"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pierre-besnard-anarcho-syndicalism-and-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 3rd January 2021 from libcom.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "pierre-besnard-anarcho-syndicalism-and-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pierre-besnard-anarcho-syndicalism-and-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       I. What is Revolutionary Anarchism?        II. What is Anarcho-Syndicalism?          Anarcho-Syndicalism: a movement of trial and error          Historical Comments          Revolutionary Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism Share a Common Objective          The Role of the Anarchist Groups and the Unions          Relationship between Anarchism and Anarcho-syndicalism        General Conclusions The following excerpts, translated by Paul Sharkey and appearing in English for the first time, are taken from Pierre Besnard’s address to the June 1937 Paris Congress of the anarcho-syndicalist International Workers’ Association (IWA), L’Anarcho-Syndicalisme et l’Anarchisme, Rapport de Pierre Besnard, Secretaire de l’A.I.T. au Congrès Anarchiste International de 1937 (dated 30 May 1937; republished as a supplement to le Monde Libertaire, 1963), for which Alexander Schapiro wrote the (previously posted) introduction. The IWA held a special congress in Paris, June 11–13, 1937, to debate the relationship between the anarcho-syndicalist and anarchist movements, and to deal with the participation of the Spanish CNT in the Republican government in Spain as part of its fight against fascism. In July 1937, the well respected French anarchist, Sebastien Faure [Anarchism, Volume 1, Selection 66] published a stinging rebuke of the Spanish anarchists in the French anarchist paper, Le Libertaire, in a series of articles entitled “The Fatal Slope,” castigating them for joining the government. The CNT was furious, and forced Besnard to resign as general secretary of the IWA. Besnard was very active in the French anarcho-syndicalist movement from the end of the First World War until the Second World War. He contributed to Faure’s Encyclopédie anarchiste, and wrote several books on the theory and practice of revolutionary syndicalism, including Les syndicats ouvriers et la révolution sociale (Paris: Le Monde nouveau, 1930); Le Monde nouveau (Paris: CGTSR, 1936); and L’Ethique du syndicalisme (Paris: CGTSR, 1938). He tried to modernize anarcho-syndicalism, and to persuade other anarchists to support anarcho-syndicalist trade unions without derogating from their independence and autonomy. Nevertheless, Besnard sought to achieve ideological unity among anarchists, taking a position somewhat similar to the Platformists associated with the Russian anarchist, Peter Arshinov, and the Ukrainian anarchist partisan, Nestor Makhno (Anarchism, Volume 1, Selection 115). For more on Besnard, see Wayne Thorpe, “Anarchosyndicalism in Inter-War France: The Vision of Pierre Besnard,” European History Quarterly, Vol. 26, No. 4, 559–590 (1996). Revolutionary Anarchism is a movement whose doctrine is designed to institute an individual and collective existence from which the State, Government and Authority will be barred. Incontrovertibly, the foundation of that society will be man. So Anarchism is the affirmation of an ongoing social demand in the here-and-now and into the infinite future, into the indefinite future. It implies an economic, administrative and social project and has to begin right now…Historically, Revolutionary Anarchism is the third branch of traditional socialism. By contrast with the other two branches, Socialism and Communism — both of them political, authoritarian and statist — it is a-political, anti-parliamentary and anti-statist. Its essential feature is freedom in a context of accountability, individual and collective alike. Its chief tasks at present are: propaganda, popularization and social education of the labouring masses today and, tomorrow, the administration of society. Anarcho-Syndicalism is an organizational and organized movement. It draws its doctrine form Anarchism and its organizational format from Revolutionary Syndicalism. It is the contemporary expression of the anarchist doctrine as regards matters economic and social. In terms of the revolution, it is also, as the Spanish experience itself has demonstrated, the essential ag…
