---
title: "Asking questions with the Zapatistas"
author: "Yavor Tarinski, Ioanna-Maria Maravelidi, Theodoros Karyotis"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theodoros-karyotis-ioanna-maria-maravelidi-yavor-tarinski-asking-questions-with-the-zapatistas"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Reflections from Greece on our Civilizational Impasse"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "theodoros-karyotis-ioanna-maria-maravelidi-yavor-tarinski-asking-questions-with-the-zapatistas.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/theodoros-karyotis-ioanna-maria-maravelidi-yavor-tarinski-asking-questions-with-the-zapatistas.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Introduction        Confronted with a Civilizational Impasse…        …It is Time to Reinvent Ourselves as Collective Subjects      Zapatismo and its Global Irradiation        The Emergence of the Zapatista Struggle        Zapatismo’s Contribution to the Evolution of Social Movements          Pace of the Snail vs. Efficiency          Self-Institution vs. Centralism          Emancipatory Laws vs. Aversion to Institutions          Social Emancipation vs. Economism          Feminism vs. Militarism          Groundedness vs. Globalism        Resonance between Zapatismo and Diverse bottom-up Emancipatory Projects          Autonomy and Direct Democracy          Libertarian Municipalism          Degrowth and the Commons          Climate Justice      The Difficulties of ‘Translating’ Zapatismo to European Contexts          Urban Geographies          The Material and Symbolic Presence of the State          The Need for Roots          Ecological Thinking      Epilogue        The Arrival of the Zapatistas in Greece: Expectations, Priorities        Reflections on Moving Forward      References      Further Reading      Bios The Zapatista delegation arrives on the European continent in the midst of extraordinary circumstances. On the one hand, all societies are suffering from a health crisis as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. On the other, the effects of the disastrous human-induced climate crisis are being felt worldwide. Floods, draughts and wildfires are affecting ecosystems and human settlements in the European continent at an unprecedented scale and frequency. These developments come at a time when financialized capitalism runs from one systemic crisis to the next, intensifying the exploitation of humans and nature in order to maintain its profitability, and thus creating an accelerating vicious circle of crisis and degradation. It is disheartening that amid such a civilizational impasse brought about by a predatory economic system that puts no bounds to wealth hoarding by the few, our capacity to imagine a post-capitalist future is seriously limited. Indeed, the status quo is naturalized to such an extent, that it is easier today to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism ; an airless mentality Mark Fisher (2009) dubbed “capitalist realism”. Indeed, the most worrying among our multiple global crises is the crisis of the imagination. Commonplace ideas such as the belief in technological domination over nature or unlimited economic growth are proving to be disastrous for the entire human species and the planet. Even in the face of imminent disaster, however, the solutions proposed leave the essential extractive and expanding nature of the economy unquestioned. The concepts of “green growth” or “decoupling” are attempts precisely at mitigating only the most extreme effects of the economy on the climate while keeping in place or even intensifying the operation of a system that generates and recycles the extreme class, race and gender inequalities that lie at the root of ecological imbalances. In their turn, those ecological imbalances, compounded by the shrinking of time and space, form the substrate on which the pandemic propagates. The Covid-19 pandemic has been a powerful ‘reality check’ for all societies, as it has brought to light the inadequacy of state and market mechanisms of care and welfare. This is particularly so in regard to healthcare, food provision and housing, especially in a country such as Greece, which has experienced a decade of anti-social neoliberal reforms. After decades of deepening atomization, isolation and competition, people are coming to realise that their safety and happiness relies on complex social relationships and collective infrastructures of care. They are becoming aware that the essential tasks for their survival and safety consist to a great extent in the ‘frontline work’ carried out by low-paid, precarious and often racialized workers or the unpaid care work carried out largel…
