---
title: "Envisioning a Buddhist Anarchism"
author: "Ian Mayes"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ian-mayes-envisioning-a-buddhist-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 2020-10-11 from https://parenthesiseye.blogspot.com/2011/11/envisioning-buddhist-anarchism.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "ian-mayes-envisioning-a-buddhist-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/ian-mayes-envisioning-a-buddhist-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Time has passed        Disclaimers for potential subtlety        Core Components        Marking a new existence        Eight Streams Leading to One        Letting Go For Freedom        Taking Up Responsibility I see Buddhist anarchism as being important for two reasons. I see Buddhism as essentially being about the individual’s personal liberation from unnecessary suffering. Anarchism I see as essentially being about freeing the world, through a profound social and political transformation, from unnecessary pain. We create all of this unnecessary pain and suffering ourselves. The distinction between the two is that pain is usually a physical or an “external” thing, such as what you would normally think of with pain. There is also emotional pain, such as what comes with the loss of a loved one. Suffering is the particular kind of agony that comes about by holding onto an idea that something “should not” be happening that is happening, or “should” be happening that is not happening. This turns whatever pre-existing pain into something else, something worse. That’s suffering. Suffering is created by our own habits of mind, where we choose to put our attention and what we choose to hold onto. Pain on the other hand is inevitable in life, however the social systems and institutions that humanity has chosen to organize the world with creates more pain for people than is necessary. A Buddhist anarchism would simultaneously be eliminating unnecessary suffering in the psyche and unnecessary pain in the world, and towards more joy and appreciation of life. The other reason why I see a Buddhist anarchism as being important is that I see the two philosophies as complimenting and completing each-other. It is a union of the personal and the political, the psychological and the social, so to speak. This is ultimately about liberation in its fullest sense – both on the individual personal level and within the larger social body. The philosophy of anarchism implies that a fundamental shift in the consciousness of people is necessary. In order to have a new world without domination, property or authority, people would need to be accustomed towards living with more benevolence, attentiveness, caring and flexibility with each-other. However, this shift in consciousness is rarely explicitly stated or elaborated upon in anarchist discourse, and the skills necessary for how people can achieve this shift in consciousness are almost never taught within anarchist circles. The other angle to this is related to the arguments for what is called “Engaged Buddhism,” and that is that far too often Buddhism in practice becomes a means for people to escape from the world, to ignore the sufferings of others, and to blindly contribute to the injustices of the world. If one really does wish for the liberation of all beings, then one would inevitably be drawn to more thorough social engagement for working towards this. A number of months have elapsed since I wrote my previous essay about this subject. I’ve received a number of different responses to it, all across the board. I’ve had some time to reflect further on the matter. One thing that has struck me is that there really is no pre-existing philosophy that is formulated which goes into depth about “Buddhist anarchism.” Various people have used this label to describe themselves, different articles, blog posts, audio or video recordings have been made, yet there has been no real lineage or tradition established for “Buddhist anarchism” as such. This term was first publicly noted as being used 50 years ago, in 1961, by Gary Snyder with his essay entitled “Buddhist anarchism.” Given that Snyder is still alive, that means that we are still in the period of the first generation of living “Buddhist anarchists.” The whole thing is still very much in its initial formative stage, which means that we all can still define and lay out what we would like for a Buddhist anarchist philosophy to be. I would like to cont…
