---
title: "Anarchism’s Historical Role"
author: "Lucien van der Walt"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-anarchism-s-historical-role"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A Global View"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "lucien-van-der-walt-anarchism-s-historical-role.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lucien-van-der-walt-anarchism-s-historical-role.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A flicker        Beginnings        Spanish exceptionalism        Case against        Looking globally        Internationally speaking        Poor cousin        Poor marxism        Trade unions        Other voices [points here were linked to images]        Anarchist revolutions        Anticolonial Freedom bookshop was proud to host a talk by Lucien van der Walt, coauthor of the ground-breaking Black Flame who spoke at length about all aspects of anarchist history and movements. Me and Michael Schmidt, who is the co-author and a friend and a comrade going back many years, we were trying to understand something about the history of anarchism and of syndicalism, to understand what that history meant in the past and what it meant for movements today. Perhaps because we were in South Africa, where there had not really been a movement in the anarchist or syndicalist tradition since the early 1920s, there was no continuity and I suppose that also meant there were no preconceptions, we didn’t have any assumptions. Volume one of Black Flame is meant to be looking at historical themes in the anarchist movement, issues, like what were the big anarchist organisations? Who were the people who joined these movements? Where was it globally? We wanted to look at it at a world scale and not just look at the north Atlantic. Why did anarchist peasant movements take off in some countries? How did it spread into third world countries? And so on. The other thing we also wanted to look at was theoretical issues in the movement. That’s the [second] part – what is anarchism? The [key] thing in the book was to make the argument that it’s important to have a global view of the anarchist and syndicalist movement. Very often the way we understand the history of anarchism is constructed around the idea of ‘Spanish exceptionalism’ – that, for some reason, anarchism [only] really took off in Spain. [Giuseppe] Fanelli was sent there by [Mikhail] Bakunin – he had a huge impact and the legend goes he couldn’t even speak Spanish, but through his articulate gestures everybody thought ‘hey, this is great stuff,’ and decided to spend the next 70 years fighting for it in their millions. There’s a whole range of literature on this – ‘why were the anarchists big in Spain?” There’s a range of arguments. The “good” Marxist argument is Spain had a backward economy, anarchists reflect a backward society, put the two together and you have the CNT. You get the national character argument: well, these Latin chaps are quite lively, anarchism’s quite lively, put them together and you get the CNT. The problem with the backwardness argument is that Spain wasn’t all that much a backward economy. Where were the anarchists based? They were based in the huge industrialising cities, that was one of their big strongholds; they had a base in the countryside, and very often where in the countryside? In the huge commercial farms. Barcelona in the 1920s was one of the fastest-growing cities in Europe so the backwardness thing just doesn’t work. It’s one of these Marxist arguments that as the working class matures it all becomes naturally Marxist. The thing about Spanish character doesn’t work either. Spain also produced General Franco. To say there’s some natural Spanish inclination towards anarchism leaves out small things like the Spanish Civil War which was between two different types of Spain, two different types of Spaniard, and two different ideologies in Spain. We would argue that, in any case, the notion that Spain was exceptional is incorrect. If we want to look at Spain, of course it had a huge anarchist movement, a huge syndicalist union movement, and of course that movement went back to the 1870s, and of course that movement made a revolution in the late ’30s. However if we want to look internationally we can actually find movements that were at least as big as Spain. If we use as a small index the size of anarchist trade unions relative to the overall labour movement, i…
