---
title: "Does Work Really Work?"
author: "L. Susan Brown"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/l-susan-brown-does-work-really-work"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Taken from Kick It Over 35 PO Box 5811, Station A, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5W 1P2 L. Susan Brown holds a Ph.D. from the University of Toronto. She is author of The Politics of Individualism: Liberalism, Liberal Feminism and Anarchism (Black Rose Books, 1993). She is currently doing “this, that and"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "l-susan-brown-does-work-really-work.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/l-susan-brown-does-work-really-work.epub"
    hosted: false
---

One of the first questions people often ask when they are introduced to one another in our society is, “what do you do?” This is more than just polite small talk — it is an indication of the immense importance work has for us. Work gives us a place in the world; it is our identity, it defines us; and, ultimately, it confines us. Witness the psychic dislocation when we lose our jobs, when we are fired, laid off, forced to retire, or when we fail to get the job we applied for in the first place. An unemployed person is defined not in positive but in negative terms: to be unemployed is to lack work. To lack work is to be socially and economically marginalized. To answer “nothing” to the question “what do you do?” is emotionally difficult and socially unacceptable. Most unemployed people would rather answer such a question with vague replies like “I’m between contracts” or “I have a few resumes out and the prospects look promising” than admit outright that they do not work. For to not work in our society is to lack social significance — it is to be a nothing, because nothing is what you do. Those who do work (and they are becoming less numerous as our economies slowly disintegrate) are something — they are teachers, nurses, doctors, factory workers, machinists, dental assistants, coaches, librarians, secretaries, bus drivers, and so on. They have identities defined by what they do. They are considered normal productive members of our society. Legally, their work is considered to be subject to an employment contract, which, if not explicitly laid out at the beginning of employment, is implicitly understood to be part of the relationship between employee and employer. The employment contract is based on the idea that it is possible for a fair exchange to occur between an employee who trades her/his skills and labour for wages supplied by the employer. Such an idea presupposes that a person’s skills and labour are not inseparable from them, but are rather separate attributes that can be treated like property to be bought and sold. The employment contract assumes that a machinist or an exotic dancer, for instance, have the capacity to separate out from themselves the particular elements that are required by the employer and are then able to enter into an agreement with the employer to exchange only those attributes for money. The machinist is able to sell technical skills while the exotic dancer is able to sell sexual appeal, and, according to the employment contract, they both do so without selling themselves as people. Political scientists and economists refer to such attributes as “property in the person,” and speak about a person’s ability to contract out labour power in the form of property in the person. In our society, then, work is defined as the act by which an employee contracts out her or his labour power as property in the person to an employer for fair monetary compensation. This way of describing work, of understanding it as a fair exchange between two equals, hides the real relationship between employer and employee: that of domination and subordination. For if the truth behind the employment contract were widely known, workers in our society would refuse to work, because they would see that it is impossible for human individuals to truly separate out labour power from themselves. “Property in the person” doesn’t really exist as something that an individual can simply sell as a separate thing. Machinists cannot just detach from themselves the specific skills needed by an employer; those skills are part of an organic whole that cannot be disengaged from the entire person; similarly, sex appeal is an intrinsic part of exotic dancers, and it is incomprehensible how such a constitutive, intangible characteristic could be severed from the dancers themselves. A dancer has to be totally present in order to dance, just like a machinist must be totally present in order to work; neither can just send their discrete skills to do t…
