---
title: "Every compromise in defense of Mother Earth"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2025"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-every-compromise-in-defense-of-mother-earth"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An anarchist critique of Block Cop City’s nonviolence proposal"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-every-compromise-in-defense-of-mother-earth.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-every-compromise-in-defense-of-mother-earth.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       WHY NONVIOLENCE?        WHY IS THIS ACTION HAPPENING NOW?        WHAT IS THE PLAN FOR THE ACTION ITSELF?        WHAT ARE THE RISKS?        WHO IS INVOLVED IN PLANNING THE ACTION?        WHAT IS AN AFFINITY GROUP? HOW WILL THEY BE ORGANIZED? “If you think it’s stupid, if you think it’s liberal, you don’t have to come.” – A presenter, “Weelaunee Worldwide: Mass Action Speaking Tour” There is a proposed plan for a single day of nonviolent action on November 13 at the Cop City construction site in so-called Atlanta. We think that this proposal is counter-revolutionary, poorly planned, and unnecessarily dangerous to participants. Also, it’s stupid and liberal. The following section headings and quotes are all taken from the Block Cop City FAQ. If any of our questions below resonate with you, we hope that you make them frequently asked as well. “This action will employ non-violent tactics not because we accept the state’s false dichotomy of legitimate and illegitimate protest, but rather, because we believe that a commitment to non-violent tactics will best allow us to stick together and overcome the police’s attempt to isolate and divide us.” This is doublespeak. How exactly do nonviolent tactics overcome the police’s attempts to isolate and divide us, except by accepting and reinforcing their dichotomy between what types of action are legitimate and what are not? By appealing to the type of people who believe in precisely that dichotomy? The pigs murdered Tortuguita. Adopting a strategy of turning the other cheek is a truly shameful response to its death. How can any radical who witnessed the George Floyd insurrection advocate nonviolence with a straight face and still have any self-respect when they look in the mirror? We understand that this proposal is not ideologically pacifist but “strategically” so. We disagree with this approach. Anarchy is masked, but through the black mask, our true fire shines. We need operational secrecy, anonymity, cunning, and trickery. But we are honest about what we believe in. If we don’t believe in nonviolence, then we don’t advocate it. To do otherwise is to act like a politician. “Diversity of tactics” is an activist principle, not an anarchist one. Direct action is an anarchist principle, but tactics that are designed to appeal to the media or government are indirect by definition. A foundational principle of anarchy is that the way that we do things is important. As anarchists, we want to promote self-organization that increases conflict with the State and the advocates of reform and recuperation. This can include a myriad of different activities that are technically “not-violent,” but it does not include a deliberate strategy of nonviolence. It does not include petitions or speaking truth to power. It does not include agreements to not critique or denounce reformist and recuperative behavior. Historically, some anarchists have shattered the activist model of a carefully segregated diversity of tactics, as at the 2001 G8 summit in Genoa or the 2008 Republican National Convention in Minneapolis (https://conflictmn.blackblogs.org/wrecking-you-again-for-the-very-first-time/). We don’t think that this one-day nonviolent action will be effective in stopping Cop City or challenging State repression. But even if it were to be somewhat effective in causing some minor reform or concession, this Pyrrhic victory would inevitably lead to recuperators demanding that this strategy be repeated again and again in every situation, just as Earth First! did after their inexplicable victory at Warner Creek (which they were never able to replicate again). Some strategies are recuperative by nature, no matter who is carrying them out. “We know that mass civil disobedience is an unquestionable force of the Peoples’ Power, and it is only the power of the people that can #StopCopCity.” The Power of the Forest has always and unquestionably been in the conflictuality of its defenders. Thus far, the defense of the…
