---
title: "17 Theses on Communism"
author: "Bernard Lyon"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bernard-lyon-17-theses-on-communism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Originally published in Théorie communiste n°13, 1997, published and translated in memoriam of Bernard Lyon / Alain by Endnotes Retrieved on January 20th, 2024 from https://endnotes.org.uk/posts/bernard-leon-alain-in-memoriam-b-l"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "bernard-lyon-17-theses-on-communism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/bernard-lyon-17-theses-on-communism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Production does not constitute a sphere that is separate from all other activities, it is “absorbed” within relations that are all productive relations. “Absorbed” means that the result of the activity is not opposed to the activity, that the objectification of the activity is that of relations which, although productive relations, are not “relations of production”. All the relations are relations between individuals whose singularities are no longer a contingency but are in fact their actual relations. Communism is not a mode of production; all activities are not reduced to a common norm that is immanent to each of them (value, surplus-value, the surplus product in general). For each activity people gather in networks. Each network has a different character and their basis may be geographic, thematic or emotional. As we said, they encompass material production. The networks are not “structures”, i.e. they are not subjects that differ from those who form them, but rather voluntary means of decision-making and practices in all domains; they constitute praxis itself. The central element of praxis is the palabre [1] , which is at the same time antecedent, concomitant and subsequent to all action. The palabre is the mode of decision, of control and rectficication of all acts; it has no end. It includes all activities, and for all activities we take the time to go right to the (provisional) end of the palabre. The palabre is knowledge of the real, conscious action. Conscious history means that we come to an agreement! Within a network, each member is more or less a “person-resource” for an aspect of the network’s activity. Knowledge and competences are diffused within the network by all the person-resource. In this way, within the network, the decision and the execution contain learning and research that are not separate from the palabre. In the network everyone constantly, and each in their turn, totalizes the action of the group, and therefore of the community, through the palabre. The speech which circulates incarnates the community in action. The quest for the best possible decision, for the maximum possible points of view, for an action that can be changed, or even canceled, not weighing down the future, is the constant concern of the palabre in and between the networks. Conflicts are never conflicts of interest because there is no situation to reproduce in which the conflicts are insoluble. Each individual participates in a multitude of networks, which is itself a network of networks. There are no “public networks” and “private networks,” since all of them are “public” and all are “informal”. Networks are in constant transformation, they diversify, emerge, spread or disappear in relation to the tasks that are given to them. Individuals practice nomadism between the networks, those they find already in existence for an ongoing activity, and those they create for a new activity. The network is a place and a moment as changeable as the lives of the individuals who form it. There is not a super-network incorporating the totality of networks. Each network can unite with other networks for a particular action on the global level. Indeed this is constantly necessary in order to apprehend the becoming of each local or sectoral action. The possitibility that a network specializes in the universal (large-scale orientations) is contained in the very movement of diversification, since such specialization involves a closing in on itself and its problem. In this way the problem, although it concerns everyone, can be treated as though it concerns others that the network thus tends to manage. But this possibility is normal, it is a tension towards the universal. Nomadism and attraction will always be there to end up dissolving these networks which are a permanent aspect of the totalization and are permanently reabsorbed by other networks. It is also in this way that communism totalizes and projects itself. Communism is not a “society”, the r…
