---
title: "The Bank strike: What went wrong?"
author: "Alan MacSimoin"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alan-macsimoin-the-bank-strike-what-went-wrong"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Workers Solidarity No. 35 — Summer 1992. Retrieved on 9th October 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "alan-macsimoin-the-bank-strike-what-went-wrong.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alan-macsimoin-the-bank-strike-what-went-wrong.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       THE RETURN OF WILLIAM MARTIN MURPHY        LIMITING THE CHANCE OF SUCCESS        PUBLIC OPINION ISN’T ENOUGH        ANTI-SCAB PICKETS        WAGES CHEQUES        A PATHETIC EXCUSE BANK WORKERS went back to work on April 27 th . After three weeks on strike they voted narrowly to accept a revised offer from the big four banks. The dispute began with a claim for a wage increase of 6.5%. The settlement only allowed for a 3% increase under the ‘local bargaining’ clause of the PESP, a lump sum of £1,000 in exchange for longer opening hours and one day’s extra leave. The hidden agenda was the banks’ desire to smash the staff union, the Irish Bank Officials Association. Bank management remembered the last strike in 1976, when not a single IBOA member from branch manager downwards scabbed. They were determined to break the unity and confidence of the staff. Firstly they bought off most of the 1,000 managers by offering them individually negotiated increases (though in the case of at least 50 they failed as these well paid branch managers stood by their colleagues and walked the picket line). When the IBOA lodged its claim and balloted for industrial action managers called in staff individually. They were told that if they stuck with the IBOA their career prospects would be damaged, that they could wave goodbye to any ideas of promotion. In the Bank of Ireland they were told to sign a 1913 lock-out type of letter that they would not take industrial action. Refusal meant suspension. Others were told they would never get house loans, temporary staff were told they would not be taken back unless they broke pickets and strong hints were made of transfers for union activists. This intimidation didn’t frighten the workers, it angered them. On January 20 th action began with an overtime ban and a refusal to charge customers for services like bank drafts. AIB responded with suspensions and the other three banks announced they were imposing pay cuts of 20% on everyone supporting the action. It was only after 900 workers had been suspended that the IBOA executive used its mandate to call a strike in early April. A month previously the IBOA newsheet carried a front page article by General Secretary Ciaran Ryan saying that strikes are not the best way to force concessions and that ‘limited industrial action’ which would “not discommode bank customers nor destabilise existing relationships” was the way to win. Lest we be unsure Ryan spelt it out on the ‘Today Tonight’ programme of March 4 th . “We have said it. I’ve said it so many times publicly, we don’t want to close the banks, we won’t close the banks for any type of action, one day or full closure. That will not happen and I’m delighted to get the chance to say that here this evening. What we’re doing is taking limited, and I would suggest, very responsible industrial action.” Maybe Ciaran’s views reflect his background. He previously worked for the Federated Union of Employers. Two of the banks’ negotiators used to be his juniors in the FUE. He now earns £80,000 a year as a union official. Not many people on that sort of wage belive in striking! If the executive, who were deciding strategy, believed the ‘new realist’ nonsense about strikes no longer being effective it is hardly surprising they didn’t come up with ways of winning the strike. In fact they had no clear plan for winning, just hopes that the Minister for Labour would intervene (impartially!) or that the Labour Relations Commission would give a favourable ruling. It did, the problem being that it was favourable to the banks. The executive believed that public opinion could win the dispute for them and that the government and its agencies would take a neutral position. Public opinion is a great aid in any dispute, it raises morale and can be of concrete use. However it does not, on its own, force the bosses to give in. If ever there was a popular strike in was the 1984/5 Dunnes Stores anti-apartheid strike. Despite having the …
