---
title: "Capitalism is the disease — anarchism is the cure"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-capitalism-is-the-disease-anarchism-is-the-cure"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "The author is an anarchist living in England Retrieved on 16th December 2021 from struggle.ws"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymous-capitalism-is-the-disease-anarchism-is-the-cure.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-capitalism-is-the-disease-anarchism-is-the-cure.epub"
    hosted: false
---

We find ourselves once again on the brink of an abyss; facing the horrendous prospect of propulsion into war as the result of decisions made and actions taken by a relative handful of statist, authoritarian bigots and fanatics. Once again, on each side in the coming conflict, those in authority will expect (and receive) the ultimate sacrifice from those they govern — their lives for ‘the cause’. How is it that so few can cause such misery and terror to so many; and how can they be stopped? Imperialism, the ability of countries to globally and locally dictate trade relations with other countries, is a feature of a small number of powerful capitalist states. The policies of imperialist nation states are largely dictated by the major companies based there. As the dominant world superpower, the government of the USA is in a very strong position to dictate trade relations with other countries, and does so (US foreign policy is dealt with in a separate article). The ultimate sanction of all nation states against rival nation states is war. The military apparatus of the state (armed forces and associated hardware) means it is ideally suited to waging war on its rivals — the state is the ‘war machine’. The repressive apparatus (police, courts, prisons etc.) keeps any internal dissent under control. At the same time as existing in a violent form, the state exists in our attitudes and interpersonal relationships — placed there by tradition on one hand and the media on the other. The mainstream media functions as a capitalist apparatus of consent, responsible for the mental subjugation of the people, and controlling of our hearts and minds. President W Bush’s call for a “war against terrorism” is self-contradictory, since war is the promotion of terror, bloodshed and death, in pursuit of military objectives (i.e. power politics, economics, religion). Most of the mainstream media didn’t question this however, and were quick to relay the war-on-terrorism message around the world, inflaming public opinion in the process. War-time being a time of ‘national crisis’, the sense of ‘national identity’ is reinvigorated in people’s minds. Nationalism, racism, religious intolerance and hatred are much more in evidence in a nation at war. The climate for debate and dissent is somewhat stifled. As the anarchist Randolph Bourne wrote: “The nation in war-time attains a uniformity of feeling, a hierarchy of values, culminating at the undisputed apex of the State ideal, which could not possibly be produced through any agency other than war”. To recap then, the state is the war-machine, the driving force of which is capitalism. The capitalist state also exists inside our minds by influencing our beliefs and values via the media. So working class people come to hold reactionary and false ideas such as nationalism, racism, xenophobia, sexism etc. This divides us from each other and weakens our ability to respond to the state’s destructive and dangerous manoeuvres, including war. Anarchist social revolution will smash the capitalist economy. Capitalist industry will be expropriated and private property abolished, along with currency, and exchange generally. People will socialise the means of production, distribution and communication etc. for the benefit of society as a whole. Production and distribution of goods and services will be organised by workers’ and community organisations: from each according to their ability, to each according to their need. Useless enterprises (insurance and financial services, advertising, sales, lawyers, stockbrokers....) will be closed, workers councils will take over and run those that serve a useful purpose. In this way the capitalist engine of imperialism and war is wrecked. With banks abolished and debts cancelled the economic inequalities that exist between nations at present could at last be addressed. We must strive for and establish egalitarian social relations between all people in all parts of the world. Equally fun…
