---
title: "Drawing a Balance Sheet on Marxism"
author: "Tom Wetzel"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-wetzel-drawing-a-balance-sheet-on-marxism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Based on chapter 10, 'Against Leninism', of Overcoming Capitalism: Strategy for the Working Class in the 21st Century (AK Press, 2022). Retrieved on 10 March 2024 from overcomingcapitalism.info."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "tom-wetzel-drawing-a-balance-sheet-on-marxism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/tom-wetzel-drawing-a-balance-sheet-on-marxism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

A major contribution of Marx to the socialist movement was his analysis of the structure and dynamics of the capitalist regime or social formation. The influence of Marx’s social theory went beyond the self-avowed “Marxist” parties and intellectuals, and had an influence on the broader socialist movement which has always included a variety of different viewpoints and ideas about strategy and social change. Looking at the long arc of history, Marx distinguishes various “modes of production” that have existed since the emergence of states and systems of class oppression and exploitation. The idea here is a kind of hypothesis about how we understand the dynamics of social struggles and changes. A “mode of production” is a social structure that governs production — the way the society is structured to make a living, producing the things that are needed in a society at a given time. I follow G.D.H. Cole in interpreting Marx as a realist. In the realist approach to explanation of events and changes over time, two causal components are necessary. There is the course of events that provide the triggers for new events and changes. If a bridge collapses after a large truck has crossed it, it may be that rolling of this heavy truck over the bridge was the trigger that led to the collapse. But a complete explanation always has a second component: the causal powers and structures of the agents and objects in which the change occurred. In this case we would look at the structural capacity of the bridge, the weight limits for that structure, and any recent defects. The “mode of production” provides, for Marx, the structural component in explanations of social events and changes. Strikes, social movements, elections, military revolts, even religious movements, may contribute triggering events but these take place in a structural context. For Marx the “mode of production” is made up of two parts: the “social relations of production” and the “forces of production.” In capitalism the “social relations of production” is the economic structure which generates certain inherent developmental tendencies. Central to the capitalist “social relations of production” are the capital/wage-labor relationship. Capital is not stuff or equipment but a social power relation between the capital-possessors and the proletarian class. Capital owners can go out into markets for factors of production and buy or rent whatever they need to run a business: hire workers, managers, and experts. They can buy or rent equipment, land, buildings. And then they can carry on, as their firm will own the commodities that are produced by the workforce, and thus the revenue from their sale. Capital is also divided into competing firms. These features generate characteristic “laws of motion” of capitalism, such as its tendency to constantly search for ways to reduce labor expenses per unit of output, its competitive drive for profit, and expansion of firms to survive in competition with other firms. The proletarian class is a dispossessed class — dispossessed of means for its own livelihood, such as land to grow food. Thus workers are forced by circumstances to submit to the managerial autocracy of the firms, and are systematically stripped of their control over their own labor. Workers are forced to “alienate” (give up) their control over use of their own abilities to the employers. “Alienated labor” is thus a core part of class oppression. Thus far, syndicalists and other libertarian socialists accept this part of Marx’s analysis. Classes are seen as arising from the institutional power that dominating classes have over the immediate producers in social production — production of goods and services for each other. Marx was aware that class oppression is the basis for the ability of a dominating class to exploit labor. Profits arise out of this exploitation. Hence the whole capital accumulation process is built on a framework of oppression and exploitation. However, this is where I…
