---
title: "Black Bloc, Free Speech, and the Extreme Right Threat"
author: "Jack Gerson"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-gerson-black-bloc-free-speech-and-the-extreme-right-threat"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in The Utopian 16.6. Retrieved on 11th August 2021 from utopianmag.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "jack-gerson-black-bloc-free-speech-and-the-extreme-right-threat.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jack-gerson-black-bloc-free-speech-and-the-extreme-right-threat.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Intimidation, harassment, threats, and outright violence from the far right are increasing, enabled by Trump’s bullying rhetoric and open bashing. White supremacists and right wing militias are emerging from the shadows, crawling out of their dens behind Trump’s “America First” rhetoric, his defunding of Planned Parenthood, and Trump’s various other dog whistles to spew hatred at immigrants, blacks, women, gays, Muslims, Mexican-Americans, Sikhs... While the far right is still relatively small numerically, its rising attacks must be taken seriously. There’s a growing polarization in the U.S. (and in Europe), and we’re likely just in the early stages of a rising wave of white supremacist violence, tacitly sanctioned by Trump and supported by some other prominent Republicans: On May 20, a white “alt-Right” sympathizer, Sean Urbanski, murdered an African-American Bowie State University student, Richard Collins III, on the campus of the University of Maryland. Urbanski was a member of the Facebook group “Alt-Reich: Nation.” On May 24, Greg Gianforte, Montana Republican Congressional candidate, body-slammed and repeatedly punched Guardian reporter Ben Jacobs for asking him a factual question. The election was held the next day; Gianforte won. Trump hailed the victory unconditionally and uncritically. On May 26 in Portland, a violent right wing racist murdered two men who intervened to stop his racist and Islamophobic harassment of two young women. The chairman of the Portland area Republican Party used this tragedy as an excuse for calling upon armed right wing militias (the Oath Keepers and the Three Percenters) to “protect” the public. Portland’s leading Republican advocates a fascist solution. On May 28, two Native Americans (members of the Quinault tribe) were run over and killed at a Washington State campground by a driver shouting racist slogans. On May 31, Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, a prominent black writer, activist, and socialist, cancelled a series of public lectures: “Since last Friday, I have received more than fifty hate-filled and threatening emails. Some of these emails have contained threats of violence, including murder.” The hate campaign was incited by Fox News, which had run an online story calling a speech of Taylor’s an “anti-POTUS” tirade.‘ Let’s keep this in perspective. We’re not living under fascism. For example, last month the city of New Orleans tore down the city’s four Confederate monuments. Also, Trump has yet to get significant legislation enacted, and the state’s secret police are out to get him . Although the far right is emboldened, Trump’s popular supporting is shrinking down to his core base – and should his cuts to one or more of {Medicaid, education, health care} go into effect, some of that core will surely defect. But there’s no doubt that the white supremacists and other extremists are more visible, more confident, and appear to be ramping up their threats and their outright violence. So how do we take on the right now? How do we protect against racist violence? How do we blunt its growth? To successfully take on the right, we need to act in several inter-related ways: First, we need to educate the public about what the Alt-right is and what it stands for. The American public still overwhelmingly rejects Nazis and fascism, but many (probably most) don’t know that alt-right leaders like Richard Spencer advocate extreme bigoted and genocidal policies closely resembling – if not identical to – those of the Nazis and the Klan. [The alt-right have tried to present themselves as reasonable folks whose rights to free speech are being threatened by left-wing authoritarians. Unfortunately, some of the tactics employed against them have played into their hands. More on this below.] Second, we need to build a broad united front movement to oppose the violence and the attacks on the rights of immigrants, Muslims, black and brown people, the LGBTQ community, and all others targeted by the right-wing hate …
