---
title: "Anarchism and AIDS Activism"
author: "Liz Highleyman"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/love-and-rage-revolutionary-anarchist-federation-anarchism-and-aids-activism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "This is a shortened version of the article Anarchism and AIDS Activism by Liz Highleyman that was first printed in the Anarchist newspaper Love and Rage in its June/July 1991 issue. The text as presented here comes from the zine of the same name that was most likely distributed in Minneapolis at 2nd"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "love-and-rage-revolutionary-anarchist-federation-anarchism-and-aids-activism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/love-and-rage-revolutionary-anarchist-federation-anarchism-and-aids-activism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       What AIDS Activists Do        An Anarchist Critique of AIDS Activism        AIDS and the “Big Picture” AIDS Is one of the most pressing social crises we face today, and It Is important for anarchists to respond to it. If we hope to convince people of the value of anarchism, we should have concrete strategies for dealing with pressing social concerns. Under our present system, It sometimes seems as If the government ts the only entity with the money, resources, and power to made a dent in the AIDS epidemic. At the same time, we realize that the state Is often not an ally. and may in fact be one of the greatest impediment to our fight against AIDS. AIDS activists often have a contradictory relationship with the state. ACT UP (The AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power) ts known for Its accusation that the government, by not doing enough, Is committing genocide against people with AIDS and, by extension, against the populations that are most affected by the disease. Is the government. 1n fact, responsible for every death that It falls to prevent? Certainly 1f the state devoted unltm1ted resources and effort. many current diseases might have been eliminated, Including diabetes and cancer as well as AIDS. Governments can “protect” us by instituting ever more strict regulations, but our freedom suffers as a result. A “blame-the-government” attitude can, unfortunately, allow us to deny individual and collective social responsibility and become dependent on the state. If It Is true, as activists claim, that the government does not represent our best interests. It would be foolish to rely on It as a source of solutions. Most anarchists acknowledge the value of people coming together to carry our various tasks. This is the basis of mutual aid: individuals sharing resources and skills for the benefit of everyone Involved. The differences between a task-oriented organization and a government are based on their degree of power and control and on their overall purpose. Governments have the power to compel people to do what they command: task-oriented groups depend on voluntary participation. Governments have the proven tendency, whatever their initial purpose and stated alms, to evolve into entitles whose primary function Is to maintain their existence, perpetuate dependence, and consolidate their power. Unfortunately, non-governmental “AIDS professionals” and their organizations are not immune to this tendency. It is often direct action, grass roots groups that must re-focus attention on the real needs of the people Involved. Socialists claim that government exists to serve the people. and that It is therefore a proper role of activists to demand that the state do Its job. This argument presupposes an idealistic belief that the government is basically well-intentioned. Anarchists generally believe that the state is not well-intentioned, and that it exists to serve a powerful elite. The first view (held by many liberals as well as socialists) claims that through educational, persuasion, and democratic process, we can convince the government to use its (that is our) resources to meet human needs. The opposite view claims that since government Is unwilling to use its (our) resources for what we feel is important, we would be better off putting the time, money (including taxes). and effort that we currently devote to petitioning, supporting. and evading the government Into alternative activities that meet our needs directly. ACT UP and similar AIDS direct action groups follow an anarchist model In many ways, although their overall attitude toward the state ts ambiguous. For example, these groups are: Decentralized — there is no formal leadership, either within or among chapters. ACT UP began in New York City In 1987, and has branched out to other cities and towns, evolving to meet the needs of local communities. There is not top-down agenda or methodology. Different groups use different strategies and tactics to achieve their goals. though the…
