---
title: "Especifismo"
author: "Furious Five Collective"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/furious-five-collective-especifismo"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A US anarchist group explains what Especifismo is"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "furious-five-collective-especifismo.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/furious-five-collective-especifismo.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Historical Perspective        Especifismo Elaborated Throughout the world anarchist involvement within mass movements as well [as] the development of specifically anarchist organizations is on the upsurge. This trend is helping anarchism regain legitimacy as a dynamic political force within movements. In this light, Especifismo, a concept born out of nearly 50 years of anarchist experiences in South America, is gaining currency world-wide. Though many anarchists may be familiar with some of Especifismo’s ideas, it is an original contribution to anarchist thought. While more of a practice than a developed ideology, the first organization to promote the concept of Especifismo was the Uruguayan Federaccion Anarquista Uruguaya (FAU) founded in 1956 by anarchist militants who embraced the idea of an organization which was specifically anarchist. Surviving the dictatorship in Uruguay, the FAU emerged in the mid 80’s to establish contact and influence other South American anarchist revolutionaries. The FAU’s work helped support the founding of the Federacao Anarquista Gaucha (FAG), the Federacao Anarquista Cabocla (FACA), and the Federacao Anarquista do Rio de Janeiro (FARJ) in their respective regions of Brazil and the Argentinean organization Auca (Rebel). While the key concepts of Especifismo will be expanded upon further in this article, it can be summarized in three succinct points: The need for specifically anarchist organization built around a unity of ideas and praxis. The use of the specifically anarchist organization to theorize and develop strategic political and organizing work. Active involvement and building of autonomous and popular social movements, called “social insertion.” While only coming onto the stage of Latin American anarchism within the last few decades, the ideas inherent within Especifismo touch on a historic thread running within the anarchist movement internationally. The most well known would be the Platformist current, which was started with the publishing of the “Organizational Platform of the Libertarian Communists” document written in 1926 by former peasant army leader Nestor Makhno, Ida Mett and other militants of the Dielo Trouda (Workers Cause) group based around a newspaper of the same name. Exiles of the Russian revolution, Dielo Trouda criticized the anarchist movement for lack of organization which allowed the Bolshevik’s to turn the workers soviets into instruments of one-party rule. The alternative they proposed was a ‘General Union of Anarchists’ based on Anarchist-Communism and “theoretical and tactical unity.” Other similar occurrences of ideas includes “Organizational Dualism,” which is mentioned in historical documents of the 1920’s Italian anarchist movement. This term refers the organization of anarchists both within anarchist political organization and as militants within the labor movement. In Spain, the Friends of Durruti group emerged to oppose the gradual reversal of the Spanish Revolution of 1936. In “Towards a Fresh New Revolution” they emulated some of the ideas of the Platform in critiqueas of CNT-FAI gradual reformism and collaboration. Influential organizations in the Chinese anarchist movement of the 1910’s like the Wuzhengfu-Gongchan Zhuyi Tongshi Che (Society of Anarchist-Communist Comrades) advocated similar ideas. While these different currents all have specific characteristics that developed from the movements and countries in which they originated, they all share a common thread that crosses eras and continents. By raising the need for specifically anarchist organization built around a unity of ideas and praxis, the Especifists inherently state their objection to the idea of a synthesis organization of revolutionaries or multiple currents of anarchists loosely united. While these critiques have not been elaborated by the South American Especifistas to our knowledge, North American anarchists has offered their experiences of synthesis organization as lacking a…
