---
title: "The Blair Necessities"
author: "Anarchist Federation"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-communist-federation-the-blair-necessities"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Published in Organise! Issue 47 — Winter 1997/98. Retrieved on May 13, 2013 from web.archive.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anarchist-communist-federation-the-blair-necessities.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anarchist-communist-federation-the-blair-necessities.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       SUN WORSHIP        TOUGH CHOICES-TOUGHER LIVES-TOUGH! “Through its well-publicised stands against sleaze and corruption (Labour) will hope to head off disillusion, even though its reputation for corruption in particular in municipal councils is notorious” (Organise! 46) Our comments on the Labour victory have been overtaken by recent events. Labour’s long-standing reputation for corruption has been highlighted by the ‘money for influence’ revelations concerning Formula One and Sainsbury’s. Labour’s attempts to restore confidence in democracy through its anti-corruption campaigns and postures have been severely damaged by these lightning revelations. In fact, these events have increased the growing cynicism and disillusion with parliamentary democracy, in particular among the young. Whether these trends translate into growing apathy, or a reinforcement of direct action and do-it-yourself organising remains to be seen. What is apparent is the need for revolutionary anarchists to help this reinforcement come about through sustained activity and propaganda. Labour has been more successful in some of the constitutional reforms it promised. It delivered the goods on Scottish and Welsh devolution, in the short term heading off any immediate hopes by nationalists for the break-up of the United Kingdom. It still has the support of much of the media and sections of the boss class. It has forged what is in effect a National Government, with the Liberal Democrats as junior partners and Tories like Heseltine and Mellor incorporated into its committees on the Millennium ‘celebrations’ and sport. At least in the short term it has succeeded in marginalising the Tories and increased the chances of pro-Tory splits. Labour was also very concerned about the threat posed to the monarchy by an ever-mounting popular hostility. Whilst various Labour ‘lefts’ might describe themselves as republicans, Blair and his immediate clique have fallen over themselves to show how much they admire the Royal Family as an institution and as individuals. Far from being an attempt to undermine the monarchy, as various commentators in the media believed, Blair’s intervention in the aftermath of Princess Diana’s death was in fact an attempt to save it. By forcing the Royal Family to issue a statement and to return to London to meet the crowd of mourners, Blair was forcing them to streamline and to become more ‘accessible’. He knew that only this would save them. His determination to preserve the monarchy was further underlined by the Golden Wedding Anniversary celebrations, with the unprecedented visit by the Royals to No. 10. The Blair leadership is determined to forge as much ruling class unity as possible. Alongside the above manoeuvres to include Liberal Democrats and Tories, it invited Steve Hilton, who thought up the ‘demon-eyes’ campaign, to its last party conference, as well as a gang of former advisers to Tory ministers. Also attending the conference was the editor of the Sun, who then devoted five pages in his rag praising Blair. Why does the Labour government seek this unity? It wishes to firstly put over the illusion of consensus, to return, in rhetoric only, to the so-called society of class peace championed by old-style Tories like Heath and MacMillan, and the old Labour governments of Attlee, Wilson and Callaghan. Indeed some of the Blair government’s tactics are based on a close study of Wilson’s tactics whilst in power. Will Hutton in his book The State We’re In spelt this out; “Agreement with the Lib Dems is part of the construction of a wider coalition of interests. Labour has broken away from its old role as the standard bearer of the organised working class (Shurely shome mistake?-ed.). The best in the English liberal tradition- reformist, fair-minded, tolerant, even ‘stakeholder’- is being reawakened. A new political consensus is developing; it extends from stakeholder, pro-European companies through the liberal professions to partnership-m…
