---
title: "The Basis & Preliminary Examination for a Theory of Asian Anarchism"
author: "The Commoner, Liao"
date: "2024"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/liao-the-basis-preliminary-examination-for-a-theory-of-asian-anarchism"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "https://www.thecommoner.org.uk/the-basis-preliminary-examination-for-a-theory-of-asian-anarchism/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "liao-the-basis-preliminary-examination-for-a-theory-of-asian-anarchism.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/liao-the-basis-preliminary-examination-for-a-theory-of-asian-anarchism.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Throughout my time as an anarchist, I have become intimately familiar with many schools and theories of anarchist thought. The most influential to me are that of anarchist communism, individualist anarchism, synthesis anarchism, and Black anarchism. Black anarchism was particularly influential to me for its unique perspective on how capitalism and the State intersect with racism to more extensively affect Black communities — along with its criticism of class reductionism within leftist movements. As an Asian American, Black anarchism led me to wonder if there was a similar tradition that involved ideas of Asian cultures and historical practices with anarchism, an Asian anarchism. A few months ago, I began looking for an anarchist tradition that had stemmed from Asia or the Asian diaspora. While I was able to find various sources regarding anarchist actions in Asian countries, there was a shocking lack of any pan-Asian anarchist framework or theoretical analysis. This made little sense to me as both within Asian countries and the Asian diaspora, there is an abundance of cross-ethnic solidarity and revolutionary spirit as well as ideas that are unique to these people groups. The Asian diaspora has faced shared oppression in the experience of Asian peoples in the West due to the past and continued prevalence of colonialism, imperialism, and racism. From there and through more research, I have come to the conclusion that it is necessary to create a pan-Asian anarchist theory that builds on the revolutionary tradition of Asian communities and groups to add a new perspective that draws from historical praxis and theory while moving away from Western-centric thought. There have been a significant number of libertarian socialist and explicitly anarchist movements in Asian countries, mostly across East Asia and Southeast Asia, with a minority in South Asia. Many of these movements were and are transnational. Despite the significance of these movements, there has been no shared anarchist tradition between these movements up to this point. However, through a historical analysis of these movements, certain influences of Asian cultures and philosophies, and current material conditions of Asians in both Asia and the wider Asian diaspora, I can only conclude that a unified theory of Asian anarchism is not only possible, but necessary — now more than ever. This article will begin a series on this topic, the first explaining why a pan-Asian theory of anarchism is needed, while the next expands upon what a theory of pan-Asian anarchism would actually look like. However, before discussing a theory of Asian anarchism, it seems prudent that I first provide what is meant by ‘Asian’ in this context. I intend to derive my definition from three key sources: (1) the ideas of pan-Asianism to unify political and economic goals of Asian peoples, (2) the Asian Socialist Conference and their conception of Asian socialism, and (3) the use of solidarity by the Asian American Movement to unite groups from the Asian diaspora. It is important to note that Asian cultures are extremely diverse in character and should not be racialized as a homogeneous group. Building off of that, it must be said that a single unitary theory of Asian anarchism would not only be undesirable but also impossible. A theory of Asian anarchism would serve as a school of thought filled with a plurality of ideas that are pan-Asian — coming from throughout Asia and the Asian diaspora. The idea of Pan-Asianism has had a long and storied history; here I will be primarily focusing on the idea of a united Asian front politically and economically while rejecting any associated ideas of nationalism, superiorism, traditionally hierarchical Asian values, ethnocentrism, and others that are inherently opposed to anarchism and its goal of deconstructing hierarchy. In order to later explore the composition of Asian anarchism and why it’s needed, the historical precedent must be examined to get a sense …
