---
title: "The EZLN and Indigenous Autonomous Municipalities"
author: "Mariana Mora"
date: "2020"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mariana-mora-the-ezln-and-indigenous-autonomous-municipalities"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 4th August 2020 from http://struggle.ws/mexico/comment/auto_munc.html"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "mariana-mora-the-ezln-and-indigenous-autonomous-municipalities.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/mariana-mora-the-ezln-and-indigenous-autonomous-municipalities.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Constructing Local Indigenous Power        Threat to the Powers that Be        The Bloodshed Continues to Escalate        Those that Live Under the Earth Topple the Tree of Power During the first 2 weeks of this year the Mexican army, under the pretext of disarming supposedly “dangerous” organized groups, stormed into several Ejercito Zapatista de Liberacion Nacional (EZLN) support base communities in the state of Chiapas, ransacked the inhabitants’ homes, stole their cattle, killed farm animals, terrified children, and even tortured a handful of men. After the military’s first act of hostility, un-armed indigenous women refused to allow them to pillage their homes again, took the initiative and fought back with rage. For over a week, relatively non-violent confrontations between Mexican soldiers and furious indigenous women demonstrated the powerful resistance deeply ingrained in the hearts of the Mayan people. Petite Tzotzil women in their colorful embroidered blouses, armed only with sticks and stones and carrying babies on their backs, shoved heavily armed Mexican soldiers until they reluctantly withdrew from the fog covered highland community of Xo’yep. In the canyon of Ocosingo, several hundred women, children, and men, from the village of Galeana hurled sticks and insults at 200 soldiers as they chased them back down the steep mountain path and away from their homes. On January 3 rd , 70 soldiers entered into the community of Morelia and, at gun point, threatened to search people’s homes. A human wall of women and children detained them. In order to prevent the soldiers from invading their village again, the women for a week constructed a 24 hour checkpoint blocking the nearby dirt road and monitoring all passing vehicles. When several hundred soldiers appeared on January 8 th , an 60 women rushed towards them, flinging stones at the armored trucks and slamming sticks down onto the helmets of the few soldiers unfortunate enough to have tried to step down. The shocked men, unsure how to react, retreated as the women ran after their vehicles for over 2km. “We held a meeting and decided that we were going to throw out the army if they came,” explained Roselia, a middle-aged women from Morelia. “ We are not scared of the military, we think that if they are going to shoot, well then they are going to shoot. But we have decided that we are going to defend our communities, we are going to protect our men, because if they take our husbands away they will torture, even kill them. That is what we no longer want, we don’t want anymore death....We want the government to stop lying and comply with the San Andres Peace Accords [on indigenous right and culture, signed by the EZLN and government representatives on February 16, 1996]. We want everything for the pueblo and not just for a few people or for one community,” she declared with penetrating brown eyes. Unlike the February 9, 1995 offensive by the Mexican military, when the support base communities fled their homes and hid in the mountains, the inhabitants of the so called “conflict zone” decided to take a stronger stance and, without the use of weapons, defend the new societies they have so carefully been constructing since they showed their masked faces to the world on January 1 st , 1994. The re-newed hostilities by the Mexican federal army during the first weeks of the year, the massacre by paramilitary death squads of 45 innocent Tzotziles from the community of Acteal on December 22, 1997, and the continuous lies on the part of the Mexican government as it fails to comply with the San Andres Accords all share one goal: to destroy at all costs the EZLN initiated autonomous municipalities which geographically re-configure over a third of the southeastern state’s territory and serve as a model of self-determination for Mexico’s 52 indigenous groups. On December 19, 1995, the EZLN, in a political-military action, broke the Mexican army’s encirclement of the Lacandon jung…
