---
title: "Barcelona 19th July 1936"
author: "Albert Meltzer, Vedetta, Giuseppe Ruozzi, Miguel Garcia"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/albert-meltzer-barcelona-19th-july-1936"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A glimpse into the elsewhere"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "albert-meltzer-barcelona-19th-july-1936.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/albert-meltzer-barcelona-19th-july-1936.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     Miguel Garcia BARCELONA IS OURS!      Tranquillo (Giuseppe Ruozzi) 19 JULY IN BARCELONA      Vedetta LETTERS FROM SPAIN A glimpse into the elsewhere of an upturning so great that it is unimaginable, where certainties are swept away in an instant and life itself takes on a fragile intensity. These accounts contain a grain of everything it is possible to foresee of the ultimate fight for freedom and other aspects that could never have been dreamt in our worst nightmares. They inform, inspire but also warn: we need to recognise the enemies of freedom and self organisation in the paths we tread, blinded by our iconography of the enemy which is also standing right next to us and calls us comrade, albeit hissed through clenched teeth. With love in our hearts. * * * * * Most workers had rushed to CNT union halls and from there, generally with no more than work and domestic tools—axes, hatchets, knives—surrounded the military government building. At 28, veteran of many struggles, Miguel gathered up his friends in the plaza Real and they rushed in the other direction, up the Ramblas into wealthy Barcelona, storming the gunshops. They collected a formidable round of weapons from a prepared list of sports shops and then went to Columbus Square. (A tense moment when they passed an armed Civil Guard squad: whether to go forward or backwards was inviting to be shot in the back. Defiantly they passed, shouting the slogans of the CNT. The Guard saluted. It was loyal to the Popular Front—not to the point of marching to the square to fight the Fascist rebels, but to the point of passively obeying whatever government was.) Albert Meltzer. * * * ..even the priests and friars were without pity as they machine-gunned the people from their convents and churches. A seriously injured man had to remain on the ground for many long hours without any assistance because the nurses from the nearby hospital were targeted from the windows of a convent and had to suspend their rescue efforts. The people eventually lost their patience and set fire to all the convents and churches. The cathedral was saved, but the bishop’s palace was put to the flames. The purifying fire lasted several days as the people’s joy continued. At least nine tenths of churches and convents of Barcelona are now nothing more than ruins. Tranquillo. * * * ..alarming symptoms are announcing themselves. Starting from the news that we have, with a certain frequency, of acts of vandalism, fraud or extortion even carried out in the name of the C.N.T. and the F.A.I ., the latter organization, the Iberian Anarchist Federation, published in the newspaper Tierra y Libertad of 30 July and had thousands of copies posted up and circulated throughout the city, a poster you would think had been drawn up in the police station and a declaration of war against the small and large criminals in question, against whom is undoubtedly imposed the death penalty by firing squad. Vedetta BARCELONA IS OURS! That is what they were shouting at the end of that now famous day, the l9th of July 1936. Everywhere the black-and-red flag of the CNT was flying. The bands were playing on the Ramblas. The people were delirious with excitement. They had hit back at world fascism and sent it reeling. It was the day before that the news, so long expected, had come. The Army had decided to take over the Republic. It was staging a coup d’etat. The Falange was declaring that this was the hour when Spain would be transformed into a Fascist State. We had read with horror for three years of the unparalleled atrocities in Germany. The terror against political opponents, the pogrom that had been launched against the Jews, the transformation of the country into a War State. We knew that the generals of Spain would hesitate at none of this so far as we were concerned. They had been as surely taught that the people was ‘scum’ as the Nazis had taught that the Jews were ‘inferior’. There was no mercy to be had from them. Led by the Fala…
