---
title: "Freeganism is not easy, it’s Anarchy."
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2018"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymus-freeganism-is-not-easy-it-s-anarchy"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "a reaction to “Freeganism is not anarchy, it’s just easy”."
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "anonymus-freeganism-is-not-easy-it-s-anarchy.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymus-freeganism-is-not-easy-it-s-anarchy.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction        Animals Are Not Products        The Myth of Sustainability, and Consumer Choice.        Freeganism is Not Easy, It’s Anarchy.        Primitivism, Hunter-gatherers and Misconceptions of Wildness        Towards Total Liberation        Conclusion This is an answer to the text “Freeganism is not anarchy, its just easy”. https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/freeganism-is-not-anarchy-its-just-easy It might be better to read the other text first, since most of the points made in this text are answer to objections to freeganism done in the other text. What I write here is just one freegan wiew, other freegans may have other ideas, but my take on freeganism is quite far away from what is described in the other text. I think the origin of the difference in point of wiew here is a difference in the philosophical approach. “Freeganism is not anarchy, it’s just easy” has a rather dogmatic approach, when I have a rather consequentialist one. It is no more blurring a line to eat dairy products found in a dumpster than finding vegans consuming luxery products imported form the other side of the earth (don’t want to name too many compagnies, but coffee, chocolate, fancy vegan restaurants etc) So let’s take the same structure for the text, and propose different arguments: First of all, freeganism is not about not spending money. table diving, consuming annimal ‘products’ that were baught for you by someone else (charity, family, etc) are not freegan actions. Freeganism is about creating no demand in the economical system. it doesn’t matter if this demand is created directly or indirectly through other actors. The fact of consuming annimal ‘products’, found through dumpster diving for instance, has nothing to do with “honouring” or “respecting” the annimal. it has to do with not wasting. I agree that this implies using annimals as a ‘product’ to a certain extent, but it’s neither anthropocentric nor entrenched in capitalistic ideas. A freegan won’t go in any restaurant, even a vegan one. more on that in the “consumer choice” chapter. Basically, using annimal ‘products’ that were thrown away is a compromise that a freegan choose to make when confronted to the alternative of leting it be processed by the waste managment compagny (which has nothing in common with beeing “reabsorbed by the ecosystem as they would naturally”). Every production has an ecological impact, and the huge amount of production that is wasted is one of the biggest factors of mass extinction of speacies. With a consequentialist point of wiew, freeganism has less negative impact on annimal condition and ecology than veganism, because the waste (and we are not only talking annimal ‘products’ here, most of what freegans use is actually vegan) is here, and there is not a whole lot that we can do about it. One point still stands, it’s that by accepting to eat/consume annimals in wathever form, a freegan contributes to the normalisation (or rather the status quo that it’s normal) of consuming annimals. this negative effect has to be counted, and as much as possible the freegan actions have to be accompagnied with explainations. Freeganism is a pragmatic transition towards a vegan society. It comes from an acknowlegment that our societies are shitty, that all problems are linked, and that refusing overproduction, especially when this production is or leads to annimal exploitation. Here again, I must say that there is a difference between dumpster diving and shop lifting. Shop lifting is not freegan (once again, I’m talking about my wiew of freeganism, there are as many takes on freeganism than there are freegans), because it still has an impact on the production. The main objection to freeganism in this paragraph is that it’s dependant on the pre-existing capitalism and waste to be possible. with some arguments like “personal greenwashing” “passive in it’s nature” “does not confront the unfair distribution of food”. Freeganism is and can only be a transi…
