---
title: "A Complete Idiot’s Guide to the Imaginary Party"
author: "Anonymous"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-transmetropolitan-review-a-complete-idiot-s-guide-to-the-imaginary-party"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "An Overview and Exploration of Both the Ideas and Applications That Evolved Out of the French Theoretical Journal, Tiqqun"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "the-transmetropolitan-review-a-complete-idiot-s-guide-to-the-imaginary-party.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/the-transmetropolitan-review-a-complete-idiot-s-guide-to-the-imaginary-party.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       A Brief Introduction To The Text        The Classiness Of The Imaginary Party        The Shapeliness Of The Imaginary Party        The Fierceness Of The Imaginary Party        An Imaginary Conclusion tl;dr: you don’t need or want the people who you know aren’t “with you” to be with you. really, you don’t – Wendy Trevino , Revolutionary Letter , 2018 A long time ago, on a vast plateau in central France, I was helping some friends build a wooden house. The spring of 2013 had just arrived, the air was getting warm, and the snow from a few weeks earlier had been replaced by rain. We were in the middle of digging holes for the foundation, an thwarted by large chunks of pure granite. In between sessions with the jack-hammer, we’d swing our picks and chip away at the crumbling boulders buried beneath the wet earth. We talked about many things while we worked and eventually reached the subject of contemporary nihilism. All of us had been critiqued by nihilists for a variety of reasons with our efforts labeled as social, liberal, positivist, or reformist. In particular, my French friends had been accused of “entering retirement” with their cabins on the plateau. Just as this fact was relayed to me, the clouds broke open and allowed the sunlight to hit our faces. Before anyone could speak, two rainbows appeared no more than twenty feet away, towering over our holes in the ground. All we could do was laugh in joy, because these don’t just happen. Shortly after this, we began to discuss the Imaginary Party and its implications for the future of struggle. My friend claimed that of all the theoretical concepts expounded in the works of Tiqqun and the Invisible Committee, the idea of the Imaginary Party remained obscure for both its French and North American audience. Despite its centrality to their entire body of work, the Imaginary Party has never been examined beyond a few cursory paragraphs. While the The Call, Theory of Bloom, Theory of the Young-Girl, This is Not a Program, The Coming Insurrection, To Our Friends, Now, and Introduction to Civil War have been canonized by both the academic and radical press, the Theses on the Imaginary Party have been consistently ignored, especially in the United States, a place where the text has the most practical relevance. When the great insurrectionary wave hit the US in 2008, multiple constellations of rebels had already read these French texts and were implementing some of their concepts into a lived praxis. Most of the theories and formulations in Tiqqun remained incomprehensible to their US readers, often dismissed as jargon-laden precursors to simpler texts like The Call and The Coming Insurrection. Oddly enough, despite constant criticism, it was the Theses on the Imaginary Party that had the most influence on anarchist praxis in the US between 2008 and 2010. Of all the ideas emerging from France, these were clearly the most practical. Two projects emerged in those heady days that were influenced by the Theses of the Imaginary Party and helped shape insurgent thought in North America: the blog Social Rupture and the print-publication Fire to the Prisons. Both were started by extremely rebellious people who saw the true content of modern revolt contained not within the static mobilizations and spectacles of the the Left, but in the everyday ruptures of capitalist normality. According to their viewpoint, these common rebellions were constant, uncatalogued, and rendered invisible by the State to prevent their methods from contaminating the population. By exposing their daily occurrences, these editors hoped to reveal that the source of our strength existed not in the political heavens above, but in the insurgent underworld below. Social Rupture went silent around 2010, although by then riots had already spread across the United States in response to police shootings. When the last issue of Fire to the Prisons was released in 2015, the first coordinated prisoner strike had taken place and…
