---
title: "The big question for the modern Left: The fuck is wrong with y’all?"
author: "Romeo Kokriatski"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/romeo-kokriatski-the-big-question-for-the-modern-left-the-fuck-is-wrong-with-y-all"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on 13th December 2022 from www.nihilist.li"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "romeo-kokriatski-the-big-question-for-the-modern-left-the-fuck-is-wrong-with-y-all.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/romeo-kokriatski-the-big-question-for-the-modern-left-the-fuck-is-wrong-with-y-all.epub"
    hosted: false
---

Anyone ever sit by the window one day and think, ‘Fuck, everything is awful’? I’m pretty sure the majority of the human race, has, at one time or another, had this feeling. It’s a pretty common reaction, especially nowadays. I’m not here to tell you how it isn’t true, how things will get better, how positivity influences your mood – fuck that noise. Here’s God’s honest truth – the world is a fucking shithole, and all of you are making it worse. Yes, you are. You with your petty little dramas and grievances, with your bullshit entitlements and apathy, every single one of you are making it worse. A few months back, the Seattle, Washington, USA city council had a meeting on repealing a certain tax. Known as the head tax, it would have levied a 275 dollar a head tax for corps with over 20 mil in revenue. This was mostly to deal with the ‘homeless’ problem, to raise funding for affordable housing. This was a fine policy, since, as it turns out, precarious employment (what’s called the gig economy), plus stagnating wages and rising automation seems to have accelerated destitution in the grand ole United States of America. This translates into more people on the streets, in a time where social nets are seen by the Party in Power as something close to concentration camps in Nazi Germany. Especially in the Tech Cities of San Francisco, Boston, Seattle, et al. – rising housing prices have created a permanent underclass in what used to be the pretty liberal and socially supported bastions of the Democratic Party. In San Fran., the median price of rent is now, and I swear to Marx I did not make this number up, three thousand filthy fiat greenbacks per month. Going by the recommended budget that housing should make up no more than ⅓ of your monthly salary, that means, for an average, middle-class householder or renter in San Francisco, a yearly salary of a little over one hundred thousand dollars, post-tax. So there was a meeting in Seattle to discuss this tax. Obviously, monied interests in the city – namely Amazon – was quite against a tax like this, as tax avoidance is probably the only thing that can get Jeff Bezos hard anymore. So, as the community collectively discussed whether or not Jeff Bezos deserved a chubby, a brave anarchist stepped up to the mic. His short little speech is too brilliant to paraphrase, so I’ll just quote it below: “All right, I don’t got long. I’m a dad, so I have kids to take care of. What’s up, bootlickers? I haven’t seen ya’ll since the campout. I’ve got something to say. I’m tired of this fucking shit. I’m a father, I’m a veteran and I’m an anarchist. Those are three people you don’t want to piss off. I’m tired of children getting attacked in the streets, I’m tired of them sleeping in the streets. I’m tired of the very people I swore to defend get attacked by the state. So like I said out there, ya’ll need to close your fucking beaks, take resources and put them in the hands of people who need them. Seriously. What the fuck is wrong with ya’ll? Who the fuck are ya’ll to justify letting people die in the streets with your policies, your laws and your legislation. How do you justify that, killing people. I swore to give my life to defend the people from all forms of oppression. Eventually, all this shit is going to stop. Because when it’s our time, we won’t make excuses for the terror. Marx.” What the fuck is wrong with y’all indeed. (You can find this little speech online, if you want to hear the rather inspiring delivery for yourself.) Ignoring the Marxist rhetoric for now (we’ll get into it in a later article, don’t fret), let’s talk about What The Fuck Is Wrong With Y’all. Remember, I’m not here to tell you things are alright, or that things will get better. I’m here to tell you that your analysis that everything is shitty, that people are dying for no reason, that suffering is increasing with no particular end, that the planet itself is becoming quite unlivable for current human civilization – is all ri…
