---
title: "Book Summary and Review I: Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind - Yuval Noah Harari"
author: "Karaçam"
date: "2022"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/karacam-book-summary-and-review-i-sapiens-a-brief-history-of-humankind-yuval-noah-harari"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "Retrieved on August 9th 2022 from vahsikaracam.blogspot.com"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "karacam-book-summary-and-review-i-sapiens-a-brief-history-of-humankind-yuval-noah-harari.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/karacam-book-summary-and-review-i-sapiens-a-brief-history-of-humankind-yuval-noah-harari.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Introduction          1. “The Cognitive Revolution”          2. The Agricultural Revolution          3. Unification of Mankind          4. Scientific Revolution        Happiness and the Purpose of Life        The End of Sapiens          1.Biological engineering          2. Cyborg Engineering          3. Artificial Intelligence In this paper, we will summarize and criticize Yuval Noah Harari’s book, “ Sapiens: A Brief of History of Humankind. ” [1] This book has become a sensation in recent years; it occupied the best seller lists for long time, got praise from numerous “respected” people, and turned into a widely accepted long-term history of our species. Despite the fact that Harari wants to present his book as an impartial, objective and scientific account of the history of our species without the distortion of any value judgments, and the large part of the public seems to swallows this claim, Sapiens is no more than an updated version of the old idealist progressivist narrative of the technological development: Homo sapiens , with their unique cognitive abilities, are inventing ever more advanced technologies, and marching forward to transform themselves to gods: “ Homo d eus. ” Harari begins by reminding us that Homo s apiens were not alone in the world. There were other homo species on the planet as late as 10.000 years ago, and these were also human. About 2 million years ago, the archaic human species left Africa and began to spread to other continents. They developed into different human species in those places. There were at least six different human species. One of the defining features of homo species was their big brains. Big brains bestow advantages to their owners, but they also bring disadvantages such as the large energy needed to fuel those big brains. Harari doesn’t give any reasons why humans have developed big brains. There are some theories as to why (such as sexual selection, the stimulative effects of tool use, and hunting), but he is right in saying that we don’t know the definitive answer. Another unique treat of humans is bipedalism: walking upwards on two legs. These two treats necessitate the premature birth of humans. Human babies are born vulnerable, and completely dependent on adults. This has had enormous consequences on the social and familial structure of human bands. Women, on their own, couldn’t raise babies; they needed supplies and protection from other members of the tribe. This necessity increased the social abilities of humans. Genus homo’s position in the food chain, until recently, was in the middle. Humankind has ascended to the top level too quickly. Because of this, neither the ecosystems nor the humans themselves adopted a hundred percent to this reality. In contrast, lions or sharks evolved into top predator positions over millions of years. Domestication of fire and tool use were key events in the ascendance of humans into the top position of the food chain. According to Harari, despite these characteristics (big brains, bipedalism, use of stone tools, and domestication of fire) humans were still marginal creatures up until about 70.000 years ago. In the sense that they didn’t have a dominant place in the world’s ecosystems. About 70.000 years ago, Homo sapiens began to spread out of Africa. This dispersal more or less coincided with the disappearance of other homo species all over the world. Two main theories try to explain why the disappearance of other homo species occurred. One is the inter-breeding theory, and the other is the replacement theory. According to the former theory, Homo sapiens interbred with other homo species which they encountered, and they merged into single populations. The other theory states that Homo sapiens replaced other human species by driving them into extinction either by killing them directly or by driving them out from their habitats by using more effective hunting and gathering methods. DNA mapping that was conducted on Neanderthal and D…
