---
title: "Co-operation"
author: "William Henry van Ornum"
date: "2023"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-henry-van-ornum-co-operation"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "From the pages of The Twentieth Century, May 10–September 20, 1894 Retrieved on 7th May 2023 from www.libertarian-labyrinth.org"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "william-henry-van-ornum-co-operation.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-henry-van-ornum-co-operation.epub"
    hosted: false
---

     I. INTRODUCTION      II. IN ENGLAND.      III. ITS IDEAL.      IV. ANCIENT.      V. SOME EXPERIMENTS.      VI. VARIOUS SCHEMES.      VII. VARIOUS SCHEMES.      VIII. EUROPEAN CREDIT BANKS.      IX. EUROPEAN CREDIT BANKS.      X. EUROPEAN CREDIT BANKS.      XI. FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.      XII. HISTORICAL SUMMARY.      XIII. A FOUNDATION.      XIV. A PLAN.      XV. DANGERS.      XVI. DEVELOPMENT.      XVII. ACQUIREMENT AND OPERATION OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES.      XVIII. THE CO-OPERATIVE COMMONWEALTH.      XIX. CONCLUSION In view of the great interest that is being taken in the subject of Co-operation at this time; and in view of the evident confusion of thought which prevails on the subject as shown in the writings of many who assume to discuss it, I have thought it highly desirable to bring on, if possible, such a general discussion as will make clearer the true principles of Cooperation, and the prerequisites for success in co-operative enterprises. The need for such a discussion is apparent the moment we pick up any one of the thousand and one so called co-operative schemes which are offered with all possible assurance by their honest but often not well informed authors. For instance, I have frequently seen in the columns of the TWENTIETH CENTURY, proposed plans of what were called cooperative enterprises, but which were almost purely capitalistic ones, only that the capital was to be distributed in small blocks. I believe that a more general understanding of the subject will not only increase the interest in Co-operation as an ideal method of production and distribution, but it will prevent the large percentage of failures which has marked the history of Co-operation in the past. I will therefore start the discussion and invite criticism, hoping that the result will be helpful to the many co-operative schemes which are being set on foot. First then, it is necessary to clearly draw the line between Capitalism and Co-operation, so that we shall not be in danger of confounding the two. The first is the present system, or want of system, under which production and distribution is carried on. It is based upon the old notion of political economy, that there are three factors in wealth production, one of which is capital; that capital performs a part in that production and consequently is entitled to share in the product; and that interest is the natural share which capital is justified in exacting. Dividends on capital stock, royalties and profits on invested capital are ah only different forms of interest, and derive their entire sanction from this same idea of capital. This political economy is a very different thing from social economy, which is the science of the production, distribution and consumption of wealth subject only to the natural laws of social intercourse which will necessarily govern human association when freed from the arbitrary interference of the law. On the other hand, political economy is the science, so far as any science is possible, of production, distribution and consumption of wealth subject to the political institutions which interfere with the natural laws of social intercourse. Social economy is always the same, only being modified by the prevailing degree of intelligence in society; while political economy varies greatly according to the political institutions which prevail. For instance, political economy will be a very different thing in a community where the law subjects land to private ownership and monopoly, from what it would be where it were free. So, in order to understand political economy in any country, it is necessary to know the political institutions of that country in relation to wealth, etc. it should be remembered that our whole system and institution of property, particularly that of private fortunes, is the outgrowth of political, instead of social economy. Its results are the results of human enactments and not of the free play of natural forces. Land monopoly, money monopoly, pat…
