---
title: "CONTROVERSY: More On Archists, Anarchists And Egoists"
author: "Fritz R. Ward, Sidney E. Parker"
date: "2021"
category: "anarchism"
source: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sidney-e-parker-controversy-more-on-archists-anarchists-and-egoists"
source_name: "theanarchistlibrary.org"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
language: "en"
description: "A reply to commentary on Parker’s article “Archists, Anarchists and Egoists” from The Egoist (Formerly EGO), Issue 8 (1986). Printed in The Egoist (Formerly EGO), Issue 9 (1987). Retrieved 10/16/2021 from https://www.unionofegoists.com/journals/ego-1982/ego-09/"
tags:
  - "english"
  - "anarchism"
files:
  - name: "sidney-e-parker-controversy-more-on-archists-anarchists-and-egoists.epub"
    type: "EPUB"
    url: "https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/sidney-e-parker-controversy-more-on-archists-anarchists-and-egoists.epub"
    hosted: false
---

       Comments From An Anarchist (Fritz R. Ward)        In Reply To Ward (S.E. Parker) I was not overly impressed with your article “Archists, Anarchists and Egoists” in the last issue of The Egoist . In using Clark’s definition of anarchism, which I think applies only to those communists who also profess to be anarchists, I believe you have confused the issue. Anarchists do not assert (the somewhat confused quote by Mackay aside) that one must renounce domination and serve the god of non-invasion without question. They do, however, assert that in a social environment where liberty prevails, aggression will rarely be of any benefit. They also prefer anarchy because, to quote Tucker, “as a choice of blessings, liberty is the greater; as a choice of evils, liberty is the smaller.” ( Individual Liberty , p85. His essay Why I Am An Anarchist expresses a similar egoistical basis for anarchism). In short, the opposition of individualist anarchism to “domination” is definitional, not religious (1). For example, Tucker believed that interest existed because of invasive laws which prohibited free contract. But, in an anarchist society (2) he wouldn’t forbid anyone from taking interest above and beyond cost if he could get it. Tucker just didn’t think the person would be able to get such returns if conditions of liberty prevailed. Also, consider along these lines, the more recent comments by anarcho-capitalist David Friedman. Friedman believes laws will be, with few possible exceptions, libertarian in an anarcho-capitalist society because the costs of aggression would outweigh the benefits. In blunt terms, your criteria for egoistical “domination”, i.e., when one could “gain greater satisfaction from dominating than from not dominating” would simply not arise often enough to be statistically significant. Although Tucker and others postulated such a society for the future, they certainly didn’t feel that they should refrain from taking what few advantages the state offered. You already cited Robinson in this regard and you could have added that Tucker, for all his supposed “clerico-libertarianism”, had no “moral” problem investing the money left to him by his mother in interest-bearing annuity shares. The same was true of Mackay. Obviously, none of the above anarchists considered such an “archistic” act “forbidden”. Nor did such benefits which they attributed to archism prevent them from advocating anarchism (while remaining consistent egoists) since they believed that it would give greater benefits than they enjoyed under the State. In the final analysis, anarchism as advocated by the individualists is not incompatible with egoism . While it might be possible to construct some sort of non-anarchistic framework for a social organization which may be compatible with egoism under some limited circumstances, I don’t believe your essay does this (3). Instead you place undue emphasis on certain phrases and neglect the fundamental ideas of individualist anarchism. Until you can suggest a realistic alternative to anarchism in which liberty is not the greater of benefits or the lesser of evils, I will remain an anarchist. Along these lines, I think Marsden’s comments that the anarchist acts like an archist in defending his freedom, avoids coming to grips with the definition of the State as institutionalized aggression. The defensive and aggressive use of force are not the same thing. And, again, this is a question of definition, not morality. To accuse the post revolution(?) anarchist of acting like an archist is a misleading use of terms…. (1) I am excepting, of course, such natural rights anarchists as Spooner and Rothbard. (2) When I use the term “society” here I am not speaking of some entity above the individual. I merely use it as a convenient term meant to imply all the individuals living in a given region. (3) I suspect that de Sade, in Philosophy in the Bedroom , tried to do so but the result was an inadequate egoism as well as a non-a…
