---
title: "Class War 08/2018: Against the capitalist catastrophe"
author: ""
date: ""
category: "marxism"
source: "https://libcom.org/article/class-war-082018-against-capitalist-catastrophe"
source_name: "libcom.org"
cover: "https://files.libcom.org/files/images/library/CW8.jpg"
page_type: book
mirror_state: none
description: ""
tags:
  - "internationalism"
  - "Proletarios Internacionalistas"
  - "communism"
images:
  - "https://files.libcom.org/files/images/library/CW8.jpg"
links: []
files: []
---
# Class War 08/2018: Against the capitalist catastrophe

Bulletin # 08 / 2018 of Class War. Source: http://www.autistici.org/tridnivalka/class-war-08-2018-against-the-capitalist-catastrophe/

The capitalist catastrophe continues to intensify everywhere, reaching heights increasingly more incompatible with life on the planet. War spread across the length of the world, massive starvation, the intensification of exploitation, an uninterrupted cascade of suicides, objectification of all social relations, violence between and against proletarians (sexist violence, racist violence, violence against children and the elderly…), packed jails, the destruction of the Earth, increasingly more toxic food, the destruction of health, etc. The antagonism between capitalism and life has never been so devastating. Neither has there ever been such a large disproportion between the imperious necessity of a social revolution and the little intention of assuming it.

The only subject capable of solving the problems of today through a radical transformation of the society, the proletariat, shows itself incapable of putting an end to all this catastrophe. In spite of what it endures and experiences in the flesh, in spite of rebelling over and over again against the living conditions that it endures, provoking social explosions which cause the social peace to tremble in one place or another, like what we have experienced in Iran or Nicaragua, there exists a whole series of factors which impede this subject from affirming itself as an international force in order to impose its revolutionary solution to the huge problems from which we suffer.

Decades of counterrevolution and social peace have quartered the proletariat, maximizing the processes and mechanisms of capitalist reproduction which veil the very existence of the social classes (above all that of the proletariat) as such dismembering the unitary critique developed historically by this social class. The same capitalist totality upon which the reality which we live in unfolds appears fragmented by a series of ideologies which particularize each problem that this system creates, seeking a particular solution to each one of them. Consequently, specific movements are launched which approach these partial problems and try to resolve them. But not only isn’t there any solution possible to every problem taken separately, but furthermore this fragmentation at the same time alters the real content of these problems. Like so was constituted the ideology of the man’s oppression of woman, the oppression of the white race over the other races, the destruction of nature by the human being…, codifying reality under these ideological parameters. In struggling by means of a partial category, the distinct movements situate on the plane of specific groups which compete between themselves for a greater recognition of rights on part of the state. The competition between commodities is expressed politically as the competition between separate identities, all in benefit of the “transversal” politics of value and its governmental management. Like so the unitary critique of capital is displaced, a critique which contains at its core the denunciation of each aspect, not as a particularity but as an expression of a totality which determines each part, and questions the social order which reproduces all these problems.

The development of this society is closely linked to the development of the isolated individual. The generalized mercantile society excludes and dissolves all community which is not the community of money and develops everything which maximizes the social isolation. Everything which it unites it unites in separation, which is the essence of this world, and its manner of living, democracy. The effect which this reality provokes in the human community, destroying its social nature, atomizing it into isolated individuals with opposing interests, is increasingly more terrible. The citizen is today the luminous example of how mercantile development and the isolated individual develop in a parallel form. This development not only brutally negates the human community but presents huge obstacles to the struggle against capitalism, since the affirmation of this individual goes in the direction opposed to the development of the organization of the only community which opposes capital, the community of struggle, which comes from a collective being, of a revolutionary social class, the proletariat.

In this context the proletariat has enormous difficulties for acting and recognizing itself as a class. Its very being, as well as its rich historical process of struggle and its program, appears totally negated in history, be it by the deforming or hiding of this historical reality.

The dynamic of capital itself and its ideological forces project a social activity in which our class is negated as a subject, reduced to that which it is in the process of production and reproduction of capital, and to that which it is claimed it will be eternally: a simple object of capital; a simple mercantile force of labor, which can be put to use or disposed of according to the necessities of production; a simple a spectator of social occurrences.

Precisely this reality entails that the proletarians themselves believe themselves to be anything but proletarians. One is made to believe that they are not proletarian because they are employed, another believes that they are not because they are unemployed, those from further off feel themselves to be farmers as opposed to workers, another believes himself to be a merchant because they are a street vendor, many others feel too young or too old to be proletarians, there will be those also who because they are women feel less concerned by the question of their class, or feel racial oppression to be more determinant than that of class and instead of feeling like a black proletarian, Latino proletarian or Asian proletarian, feel black, Latino, or Asian… and for those who overcome these most elemental forms of immediate negation of the proletarian reality there will be other more political-ideological forms of this same negation such as that of feeling “anti-imperialist”, “anti-neoliberal”, “Palestinian”, “Jewish”, “Cuban”, “leftist”, “French”, “Yankee”, “Aymara”, “Kurdish”, “Croatian”, “first-world worker”, “feminist”, “anti-racist”, etc.

These identitarian conceptions present themselves as social-democratic forces which oppose the process of the constitution of the proletariat as a class to negate the catastrophe of this world. The perspective of class is diluted as such in an entanglement of identities and fictitious communities which live subsumed in the community of money.

At the same time, politicism continues to be one of the essential ideologies against our class. It reduces the question of social transformation to occupying the State, be it by the electoral path, be it by violence, in order to implant a series of measures which “would question the capitalist society” and would offer a “real and immediate alternative”. But the State is not a neutral organ which can be used according to the will of this or that leader or party, it’s the organization as a force of the current society, that of capital, and whoever it is that takes possession of this State is determined to act within the capitalist framework. Far from directing the state, they are directed by it. Therefore all the politicist measures are no more than different forms of the development of capital that don’t question any of the foundations of this society or present any type of real alternative. Look at Cuba, Venezuela or the current independentist process in Catalonia.

Self-management is postulated as an alternative to politicism; nevertheless it’s nothing more than its replica upon the productive terrain. If politicism reduces everything to the public sphere, self-management does the same in the productive sphere, trying to change the world without destroying power, advocating for the producers to take the means of production, just as they exist, in order to make them function without bosses, without the bourgeoisie. But this “alternative” keeps the social basis of capitalism intact, since under it there continues the development of autonomous units of commodity production, exchange, money (or “time bonds“, “labor vouchers”), meaning, capital, exploitation and all the fundamental categories of this society. To consider that the exploitation and the capitalist oppression emanate from the individual bourgeois is to not comprehend that the bourgeois is a functionary of capital, that capital, as “automatic subject“, is that which directs production. The experiences in Argentina at the beginning of the 21st century with the “recuperated” factories, or others more current like Rojava and its cooperatives, show us how self-management is capable of liquidating our struggles and giving new vigor to the capitalist economy. Self-management just as much as politicism leave intact the capitalist social relationship which must be destroyed.

Of course, for the maintenance of this society it’s also essential to make believe that all those of us who suffer the current terrible living conditions have a lesser evil to defend. There’s always something worse to look at which justifies the submission to the current society, the more or less critical support of the representatives of capital, or the renunciation of the struggle for any small crumb. Someone who lives in the asphyxiating capitalist social peace is shown the terror of war; Those who cede their life to work in order to eat are shown the unemployed with no resources who are at the breaking point in hunger; to those who want to act outside of and against the union political game “other forms of doing politics” and the “infallibility” of “direct democracy” is extolled; to those that question the left it is shown how bad the right is; to another they say that democracy is better than dictatorship; those that struggle are incited to abandon the struggle after receiving any small crumb… Like so it is hidden that everything forms a part of the same, that they are moments of the same existence subsumed to wage labor, to money, to value.

Where the proletarians rebel, launch themselves against the hell in which they live, like the struggles developed recently in Nicaragua or in Iran, global capital seeks to deny the revolutionary perspective and impose the capitalist inclination in its multiple variants. It tries to enclose the struggles and transform them into struggles against this or that government, this or that dictator, against this or that measure or arrangement, tries to transform the revolts of our class into war between bourgeois projects, to negate all questioning of this system and so absorb everything which opposes it. The summum of this repolarization is the imperialist war in which the struggle of the proletariat is driven to a struggle between bourgeois fractions, just like we currently endure in Syria, just in like other countries in the last decades.

These factors and limits of the current struggles, which imply that all the struggles end up channeled, liquidated or revitalizing capital, extend the belief in the impossibility of a social revolution. This belief becomes a material force for the conservation of this world, driving many of those who struggle to draw back from that which an international revolutionary process demands in order to become submerged in a possibilist and localist dynamic without any perspective, which ruptures the unity of the immediate struggles of our class (the struggle against the austerity measures, against the evictions, against the repression, expropriations…) from the historical struggle for the revolution.

It’s certain that the conditions of life of the proletariat bring it to overcome these obstacles over and over again and affirm itself as a class, violently opposing the current society, in spite of all the weaknesses which we bear. Nevertheless, the local framework is hardly surpassed, and only as an exception is a regional one assumed. The rest of the worldwide proletariat is not concerned by these struggles, doesn’t assume the fight which develops in one place or the other as its own fight. So an infinite amount of struggles develop in complete isolation, which are finally repolarized and/or crushed by global capital (Syria, Brazil, the Mapuches…). This issue reminds us constantly that our class cannot generate a more revolutionary perspective than assuming its struggle on a historical-universal plane. Proletarian internationalism is not a nice motto of the past, but the very terrain upon which the revolutionary struggle unfolds.

In spite of all these difficulties, in spite of all these forces and elements which act against the constitution of the proletariat as a revolutionary force, there’s no other perspective, there’s no other exit from the capitalist catastrophe than the social revolution. We don’t have doubts that the capitalist catastrophe will continue advancing and making life on this planet increasingly more impossible. Neither do we have doubts that the struggles of our class will continue reproducing themselves here and there. Nevertheless, what’s fundamental is not to perceive this evidence, but to assume and structure these struggles as one same international struggle to tear down capitalism, using the accumulated historical experience to overcome our own limits and weaknesses, as well as to denounce everything which impedes international and internationalist action against capital and the State. It’s the only real route to defend human needs against those of capital. The reforms, the hopes and dreams which justify the rejection of the revolution, are nothing more than forces for the conservation of the current world. We don’t have any other path to exit from this pit than to denounce and smash these mechanisms for the defense of capitalism which obstruct the organization of our community of struggle. To organize ourselves together –outside of and against all the structures of the State– in the struggle against this system of death, in the defense of human needs against those of capital, in the affirmation of humanity against the capitalist objectification. Everything else is walking towards the abyss to which this society drives us.

The affirmation of the human being against the absolute dehumanization which the proletarian condition contains, this is the essence of the constitution of the proletariat as a class in order to negate the social classes, the State and capital.

Let’s organize the struggle of our class internationally, against the global catastrophe of capitalism, against the whole society of classes!

Internationalist Proletarians http://www.proletariosinternacionalistas.org [email protected]

## Guerra de Clases 08/2018: Contra la catástrofe capitalista

Boletín # 08 / 2018 de Guerra de Clases. Fuente: https://www.autistici.org/tridnivalka/guerra-de-clases-08-2018-contra-la-catastrofe-capitalista/

La catástrofe capitalista sigue agudizándose en todas partes, alcanzando cotas cada vez más incompatibles con la vida en el planeta. Guerra generalizada a lo largo del mundo, hambruna masiva, intensificación de la explotación, cascada ininterrumpida de suicidios, cosificación de toda relación social, violencia entre y contra proletarios (violencia sexista, violencia racista, violencia contra niños y viejos…), cárceles atiborradas, destrucción de la Tierra, alimentación cada vez más tóxica, destrucción de la salud, etc. El antagonismo entre el capitalismo y la vida nunca fue tan devastador. Tampoco hubo nunca una desproporción tan grande entre la imperiosa necesidad de una revolución social y la poca tentativa de asumirla.

El único sujeto capaz de dar solución a los problemas de hoy mediante una transformación radical de la sociedad, el proletariado, se muestra incapaz de acabar con toda esa catástrofe. Pese a lo que padece y vive en sus carnes, pese a que una y otra vez se rebela contra las condiciones de vida que sufre, provocando estallidos sociales que hacen tambalear la paz social en tal o cual lugar, como los que recientemente vivimos en Irán o Nicaragua, existen toda una serie de factores que impiden a ese sujeto afirmarse como fuerza internacional para imponer su solución revolucionaria ante los grandes problemas que hoy padecemos.

Décadas de contrarrevolución y paz social han descuartizado al proletariado, potenciando los procesos y mecanismos de reproducción capitalista que velan la existencia misma de las clases sociales (sobre todo la del proletariado), desmembrando así la crítica unitaria desarrollada históricamente por esta clase social. La misma totalidad capitalista sobre la que se despliega la realidad que vivimos aparece fragmentada por una serie de ideologías que parcializan cada problema que este sistema genera, buscando una solución particular a cada uno de ellos. Como consecuencia, se alzan movimientos específicos que abordan esos problemas parciales y tratan de resolverlos. Pero no sólo no hay ninguna solución posible a cada problema tomado por separado, sino que además esa fragmentación altera al mismo tiempo el contenido real de esos problemas. Se constituye así la ideología de la opresión del hombre sobre la mujer, la opresión de la raza blanca sobre las demás razas, la destrucción de la naturaleza por el ser humano…, codificando la realidad bajo esos parámetros ideológicos. Al luchar a través de una categoría parcial, los distintos movimientos se sitúan en el plano de grupos específicos que compiten entre sí por un mayor reconocimiento de derechos por parte del Estado. La competencia entre mercancías se expresa políticamente como la competencia entre identidades separadas, todo en beneficio de las políticas “transversales” del valor y su gestión estatal. Se desplaza así la crítica unitaria del capitalismo, crítica que contiene en su seno la denuncia de cada aspecto, no como parcialidad, sino como expresión de una totalidad que determina cada parte y cuestiona el orden social que reproduce todos esos problemas.

El desarrollo de esta sociedad va íntimamente ligado al desarrollo del individuo aislado. La sociedad mercantil generalizada excluye y disuelve toda comunidad que no sea la comunidad del dinero y desarrolla todo lo que potencia el aislamiento social. Todo lo que une lo une en tanto que separado, esa es la esencia de este mundo, y su modo de vida, la democracia. El efecto que esta realidad provoca en la comunidad humana, destruyendo su ser social, atomizándola en individuos aislados con intereses contrapuestos, es cada vez más terrible. El ciudadano es hoy el ejemplo luminoso de cómo el desarrollo mercantil y el individuo aislado se desarrollan de forma paralela. Este desarrollo no sólo niega brutalmente la comunidad humana, sino que plantea grandes obstáculos a la lucha contra el capitalismo, pues la afirmación de ese individuo va en dirección opuesta al desarrollo y la organización de la única comunidad que se contrapone al capital, la comunidad de lucha, que parte de un ser colectivo, de una clase social revolucionaria, el proletariado.

En este contexto el proletariado tiene enormes dificultades para actuar y reconocerse como clase. Su mismo ser, así como su rico proceso histórico de lucha y su programa, aparece totalmente negado en la historia, ya sea por deformación u ocultación de esa realidad histórica. La misma dinámica del capital y sus fuerzas ideológicas proyectan una actividad social en la que nuestra clase es negada como sujeto, reducido a lo que es en el proceso de producción y reproducción del capital, y a lo que se pretende que sea eternamente: simple objeto del capital; simple mercancía fuerza de trabajo, que puede usarse o desecharse según las necesidades de la producción; simple espectador del acaecer social.

Precisamente esta realidad conlleva que los mismos proletarios se crean cualquier cosa menos proletarios. A alguno le hacen creer que no es proletario porque es empleado, el otro cree que no lo es porque está desocupado, el de más allá se siente campesino en oposición al obrero, otro se cree comerciante porque es vendedor ambulante, muchos otros se sienten demasiado niños o demasiado viejos para ser proletarios, habrá también quien por ser mujer se sienta menos concernida por la cuestión de su clase o quien sienta la opresión racial como más determinante que la de clase, y en vez de sentirse proletario negro, proletario latino o proletario amarillo, se siente negro, latino o amarillo… y para quienes superen estas formas más elementales de negación inmediata de la realidad de proletario, habrá otras formas más político-ideológicas de esa misma negación como el sentirse “antiimperialista”, “antineoliberal”, “palestino”, “judío”, “cubano”, “latino”, “de izquierdas”, “francés”, “yanqui”, “aymara”, “kurdo”, “croata”, “zapatista”, “obrero de un país rico”, “feminista”, “antiracista”, etc.

Estas concepciones identitarias se presentan como fuerzas socialdemócratas que se contraponen al proceso de constitución del proletariado en clase para negar la catástrofe de este mundo. La perspectiva de clase se diluye así en una maraña de identidades y comunidades ficticias que viven subsumidas en la comunidad del dinero.

Al mismo tiempo, el politicismo sigue siendo una de las ideologías esenciales contra nuestra clase. Reduce la cuestión de la transformación social a ocupar el Estado, sea por vía electoral, sea por la violencia, para implantar una serie de medidas que “cuestionarían la sociedad capitalista” y plantearían una “alternativa real e inmediata”. Pero el Estado no es un órgano neutro que puede ser usado según la voluntad de tal o cual dirigente o partido, es la organización en fuerza de la sociedad actual, la del capital, y sea quien sea el que tome posesión de ese Estado está determinado a actuar en el marco capitalista. Lejos de dirigir el Estado, son dirigidos por él. De ahí que todas las medidas politicistas no sean más que formas diferentes de desarrollo del capital que no cuestionan ninguna de las bases de esta sociedad ni plantean ningún tipo de alternativa real. Véase Cuba, Venezuela o el actual proceso independentista en Cataluña.

El gestionismo se postula como alternativa al politicismo; sin embargo, no es más que su réplica en el terreno productivo. Si el politicismo reduce todo a la esfera política, el gestionismo hace lo mismo en la esfera productiva, tratando de cambiar el mundo sin destruir el poder, defendiendo que los productores tomen los medios de producción, tal como existen, para hacerlos funcionar sin patronos, sin burgueses. Pero esta “alternativa” mantiene intacta la base social del capitalismo, pues bajo ella se siguen desarrollando las unidades autónomas de producción mercantil, el intercambio, el dinero (o «bonos de tiempo», «bonos de trabajo»), es decir, el capital, la explotación y todas las categorías fundamentales de esta sociedad. Considerar que la explotación y la opresión capitalistas emanan del burgués individual es no comprender que el burgués es un funcionario del capital, que el capital, en cuanto «sujeto automático», es el que dirige la producción. Las experiencias de Argentina a principios del siglo XXI con las fábricas «recuperadas», u otras más actuales como Rojava y sus cooperativas, nos enseñan cómo el gestionismo es capaz de liquidar nuestras luchas y dar nuevos bríos a la economía capitalista. Tanto el gestionismo como el politicismo dejan intacta la relación social capitalista que hay que destruir.

Por supuesto, para el mantenimiento de esta sociedad es también esencial hacer creer que todos los que sufrimos las terribles condiciones de vida actuales tenemos un mal menor que defender. Siempre hay algo peor a lo que mirar y que justifique la sumisión a la sociedad actual, el apoyo más o menos crítico a representantes del capital, o la renuncia a la lucha por cualquier migaja. Al que vive en la asfixiante paz social capitalista se le enseña el terror de la guerra; al que se deja la vida en el trabajo para echarse algo a la boca se le muestra al desocupado sin recursos presto a reventar de hambre; al que quiere actuar fuera y en contra del juego político sindical se le exaltan “otras formas de hacer política”, la “infalibilidad” de la “democracia directa”; al que cuestiona a la izquierda le muestran lo mala que es la derecha; a otro le dicen que la democracia es mejor que la dictadura; al que lucha se le incita a abandonar la lucha tras recibir cualquier migaja… Se oculta así que todo forma parte de lo mismo, que son momentos de una misma existencia subsumida al trabajo asalariado, al dinero, al valor.

Allí donde los proletarios se rebelan, se alzan contra el infierno en el que viven, como las luchas desarrolladas recientemente en Nicaragua o en Irán, el capital mundial busca negar la perspectiva revolucionaria e imponer el horizonte capitalista en sus múltiples variantes. Tratan de encuadrar las luchas y transformarlas en luchas contra tal o cual gobierno, contra tal o cual dictador, contra tal o cual medida o gestión, tratan de transformar las revueltas de nuestra clase en guerra entre proyectos burgueses, de negar todo cuestionamiento a este sistema y fagocitar así todo lo que se le contrapone. El súmmum de esta repolarización es la guerra imperialista donde la lucha del proletariado es conducida a una lucha entre fracciones burguesas, tal y como lo sufrimos actualmente en Siria, así como en otros países en las últimas décadas.

Estos factores y límites de las luchas actuales, que implican que todas las luchas acaben canalizadas, liquidadas o revitalizando al capital, extienden la creencia de la imposibilidad de una revolución social. Esta creencia se convierte en una fuerza material para la conservación de este mundo, conduciendo a muchos de los que luchan a desentenderse de lo que exige un proceso revolucionario internacional para sumergirse en una dinámica posibilista y localista sin ninguna perspectiva, lo que quiebra la unidad de las luchas inmediatas de nuestra clase (lucha contra las medidas de austeridad, contra los desahucios, contra la represión, expropiaciones…) de la lucha histórica por la revolución.

Es cierto que las condiciones de vida del proletariado le llevan una y otra vez a superar estos obstáculos y a afirmarse como clase, contraponiéndose violentamente a la sociedad actual, pese a todas las debilidades que lastramos. Sin embargo, apenas se supera el marco local, sólo excepcionalmente se asume uno regional. El resto del proletariado mundial no se siente concernido por esas luchas, no asume la pelea que en tal o cual lugar desarrolla su clase como su propia pelea. Así se desarrollan infinidad de luchas en un completo aislamiento que finalmente son repolarizadas y/o aplastadas por el capital mundial (Siria, Brasil, Mapuches…). Esta cuestión nos recuerda constantemente que nuestra clase no puede generar una perspectiva revolucionaria más que asumiendo su lucha en un plano histórico-universal. El internacionalismo proletario no es una bonita consigna del pasado, sino el terreno mismo sobre el que se despliega la lucha revolucionaria.

Pese a todas estas dificultades, pese a todas estas fuerzas y elementos que actúan contra la constitución del proletariado en fuerza revolucionaria, no hay ninguna otra perspectiva, no hay otra salida a la catástrofe capitalista que no sea la revolución social. No tenemos dudas de que la catástrofe capitalista seguirá avanzando y haciendo cada vez más imposible la vida en el planeta. Tampoco tenemos dudas de que las luchas de nuestra clase seguirán reproduciéndose aquí y allá. Sin embargo, lo fundamental no es percibir esta evidencia, sino asumir y estructurar esas luchas como una misma lucha internacional por abatir el capitalismo, utilizar la experiencia histórica acumulada para superar nuestros propios límites y debilidades, así como denunciar todo lo que impide la acción internacional e internacionalista contra el capital y el Estado. Esa es la única vía real para defender las necesidades humanas frente a las del capital. Las reformas, las ilusiones y esperanzas que justifican el rechazo a la revolución, no son más que fuerzas de conservación del mundo actual. No tenemos otro camino para salir de esta fosa que romper y denunciar esos mecanismos de defensa del capitalismo que obstaculizan la organización de nuestra comunidad de lucha. Organizarnos juntos –fuera y contra de todas las estructuras del Estado– en la lucha contra este sistema de muerte, en la defensa de las necesidades humanas frente a las del capital, en la afirmación de la humanidad frente a la cosificación capitalista. Todo lo demás es caminar hacia el abismo al que nos conduce esta sociedad.

La afirmación del ser humano frente a la deshumanización absoluta que contiene la condición proletaria, esa es la esencia de la constitución del proletariado en clase para negar las clases sociales, el Estado y el capital.

¡Organicemos internacionalmente la lucha de nuestra clase, contra la catástrofe mundial del capitalismo, contra toda la sociedad de clases!

Proletarios Internacionalistas http://www.proletariosinternacionalistas.org [email protected]

## Guerre de Classe 08/2018 : Contre la catastrophe capitaliste

Bulletin # 08 / 2018 de Guerre de Classe. Source : https://www.autistici.org/tridnivalka/guerre-de-classe-08-2018-contre-la-catastrophe-capitaliste/

La catastrophe capitaliste continue à s’intensifier partout, atteignant des niveaux toujours plus incompatibles avec la vie sur la planète. Guerre généralisée partout dans le monde, famine massive, intensification de l’exploitation, cascade ininterrompue de suicides, réification de toute relation sociale, violence entre et contre les prolétaires (exploitation, concurrence, guerres, déportations et répression), prisons surpeuplées, destruction de la Terre, alimentation chaque fois plus toxique, destruction de la santé, etc. L’antagonisme entre le capitalisme et la vie n’a jamais été aussi dévastateur. Il n’y a non plus jamais eu une disproportion aussi grande entre l’impérieux besoin d’une révolution et le peu de tentative de l’assumer.

L’unique sujet capable de donner une solution aux problèmes d’aujourd’hui grâce à une transformation radicale de la société, le prolétariat, se montre incapable d’en finir avec toute cette catastrophe. Malgré ce qu’il subit et vit dans sa chair, malgré qu’à l’une ou l’autre occasion, il se rebelle contre les conditions de vie qu’il subit, qu’il provoque des explosions sociales qui font chanceler la paix sociale dans l’un ou l’autre endroit, comme celles que nous vivons récemment en Iran ou au Nicaragua, il existe tout un ensemble de facteurs qui empêchent ce sujet de s’affirmer en tant que force internationale pour imposer sa solution révolutionnaire face aux grands problèmes dont nous souffrons aujourd’hui.

Des décennies de contre-révolution et de paix sociale ont dépecé le prolétariat, donnant plus de puissance aux processus et mécanismes de reproduction capitaliste qui masquent l’existence même des classes sociales, surtout celle du prolétariat, démembrant la critique unitaire développée historiquement par cette classe sociale. Cette totalité capitaliste sur laquelle se déploie la réalité que nous vivons apparaît fragmentée par une série d’idéologies qui partialisent chaque problème que ce système génère, cherchant une solution particulière à chacun d’eux. En conséquence, des mouvements spécifiques sont lancés qui abordent ces problèmes partiaux et tentent de les résoudre. Néanmoins, il n’y a non seulement aucune solution possible à chaque problème pris séparément, mais cette fragmentation altère de surcroît le contenu réel de ces problèmes. On constitue ainsi l’idéologie de l’oppression de l’homme sur la femme, l’oppression de la race blanche sur les autres races, la destruction de la nature par l’être humain… codifiant la réalité au filtre de ces paramètres idéologiques. En luttant au travers d’un catégorie partielle, les différents mouvements se situent sur le plan de groupes spécifiques en concurrence pour une plus grande reconnaissance de leurs droits par l’Etat. La concurrence entre marchandises s’exprime politiquement comme la concurrence entre des identités séparées, tout cela au profit des politiques globales de la valeur et sa gestion étatique. On dissout ainsi la critique unitaire du capitalisme, critique qui contient la dénonciation de chaque aspect comme expression d’une totalité et questionne l’ordre social qui reproduit tous ces problèmes.

Le développement de cette société est intimement lié au développement de l’individu isolé. La société marchande généralisée exclut et dissout toute communauté qui n’est pas la communauté de l’argent et développe tout ce qui renforce l’isolement social. Tout unir en tant que séparé, telle est l’essence de ce monde et son mode de vie, la démocratie. L’effet que cette réalité provoque dans la communauté humaine, détruisant son être social, l’atomisant en individus isolés avec des intérêts antagoniques, est chaque fois plus terrible. Le citoyen est aujourd’hui l’exemple le plus lumineux du développement conjoint de la marchandise et de l’individu isolé. Ce développement ne nie pas seulement brutalement la communauté humaine mais fait sévèrement obstacle à la lutte contre le capitalisme. L’affirmation de cet individu est en effet antagonique au développement et à l’organisation de la seule communauté qui s’oppose au capital à savoir la communauté de lutte prolétarienne, qui, quant à elle, part d’un être collectif, d’une classe sociale révolutionnaire.

Dans ce contexte, le prolétariat a d’énormes difficultés pour agir et se reconnaître comme classe. Le prolétariat se retrouve totalement nié par la déformation et l’occultation de son riche processus historique de lutte, de son programme. Cette dynamique du capital et ses forces idéologiques projettent une dynamique sociale dans laquelle le prolétariat est nié comme sujet, réduit à ce qu’il est dans le processus de production et reproduction du capital et à ce qu’on prétend qu’il est éternellement, simple objet du capital qui peut être utilisé ou jeté selon les besoins de la production, simple spectateur et victime du cours des choses. Précisément, cette réalité amène à ce que les prolétaires se croient tout ce qu’on veut sauf des prolétaires. A certains, on fait croire qu’ils ne sont pas prolétaires parce qu’ils sont employés. Un autre croit qu’il ne l’est pas parce qu’il est au chômage. Tel autre se sent paysan, en opposition à l’ouvrier. Tel autre se croit commerçant parce qu’il est vendeur ambulant. Beaucoup d’autres se sentent trop jeunes ou trop vieux pour être prolétaires. Il y en a aussi qui en tant que femmes se sentent moins concernées par la question de leur classe, tandis qu’un autre sent l’oppression raciale comme plus déterminante que la classe et, plutôt que de se sentir prolétaire latino, prolétaire noir, prolétaire asiatique, ils se sentent noirs, latinos, asiatiques. Et pour ceux qui dépassent ces formes plus élémentaires de négation immédiate de la réalité de prolétaires, il y aura des formes plus politico-idéologiques de cette même négation, comme le fait de se sentir anti-impérialiste, anti-néolibéral, palestinien, juif, cubain, de gauche, français, américain, aymara, kurde, croate, ouvrier d’un pays riche, féministe, antiraciste, etc.

Ces conceptions identitaires se présentent comme des forces social-démocrates qui s’opposent aux processus de constitution du prolétariat en classe pour nier la catastrophe de ce monde. La perspective de classe se dilue de la sorte dans un enchevêtrement d’identités et de communautés fictives qui vivent subsumées dans la communauté de l’argent.

En même temps, le politicisme continue à être l’une des idéologies essentielles contre le prolétariat. Il réduit la question de la transformation sociale à l’occupation de l’État, que ce soit par une voie électorale ou par la violence, pour implanter une série de mesures censées questionner la société capitaliste et poser une alternative réelle et immédiate. L’État n’est toutefois pas un organe neutre qui peut être utilisé selon la volonté de tel ou tel dirigeant ou parti. C’est l’organisation en force de la société actuelle, du capital, et quiconque prend possession de cet État est déterminé à agir dans le cadre capitaliste. Loin de diriger l’État, ils sont dirigés par lui. Voilà pourquoi toutes mesures politicistes ne sont rien de plus que des formes différentes de développement du capital qui ne questionnent rien des bases de cette société ni ne posent aucun type d’alternative réelle. Voyez Cuba, le Venezuela ou l’actuel processus indépendantiste en Catalogne.

Le gestionnisme se pose en alternative au politicisme mais il n’est rien de plus que sa réplique sur le terrain productif. Si le politicisme réduit tout à la sphère politique, le gestionnisme fait la même chose dans la sphère productive. Changer le monde sans détruire le pouvoir, préconisant que les producteurs prennent les moyens de production tels qu’ils existent pour les faire fonctionner sans patron, sans bourgeois. Cette alternative maintient intacte la base sociale du capitalisme parce qu’on continue à y développer les unités autonomes de production marchande, l’échange, l’argent (ou des « bons d’échange », des « bons de travail »…) et donc le capital, l’exploitation et toutes les catégories fondamentales de cette société. Considérer que l’exploitation et l’oppression capitalistes émanent du bourgeois individuel, c’est ne pas comprendre que le bourgeois est un fonctionnaire du capital, que le capital, en tant que « sujet automate », dirige la production. Les expériences en Argentine au début du XXIème siècle avec les usines récupérées ou d’autres plus actuelles comme le Rojava et ses coopératives nous enseignent comment le gestionnisme est capable de liquider nos luttes et relancer l’économie capitaliste. Politicisme comme gestionnisme ne modifient en rien le rapport social capitaliste, or c’est bien cela qu’il s’agit d’abolir.

Evidemment, pour le maintien de cette société, il est également essentiel de faire croire que nous tous qui subissons les terribles conditions de vie actuelles, nous aurions un moindre mal à défendre. Il y a toujours quelque chose de pire à montrer et qui justifie la soumission à la société actuelle, l’appui plus ou moins critique à des représentants du capital, le renoncement à la lutte pour quelques miettes. A ceux qui subissent l’asphyxiante paix sociale capitaliste, on montre la terreur de la guerre. A ceux qui perdent leur vie dans le travail pour se mettre quelque chose sous la dent, on montre le chômeur sans revenu, prêt à crever de faim. A ceux qui mettent en cause la gauche, on montre comment la droite est méchante. A ceux qui veulent agir en-dehors et contre tout jeu politique ou syndical, on vante « d’autres manières de faire de la politique », la perfectibilité de la « démocratie directe » et le bon rapport entre compromission et bienfaits des « alliances stratégiques » avec nos ennemis de classe. A tous ceux qui luttent, on recommande de capituler après avoir reçu quelques miettes. A tous, enfin, on ressasse que la démocratie est meilleure que la dictature. On occulte ainsi que toutes ces fausses alternatives font en réalité partie de la même totalité, que ce sont des moments d’une même existence subsumée au travail salarié, à l’argent, à la valeur.

Là où les prolétaires se rebellent, se lèvent contre l’enfer qu’ils vivent, comme les luttes récentes au Nicaragua ou en Iran, le capital mondial cherche à nier la perspective révolutionnaire et à imposer l’horizon capitaliste dans ses multiples variantes. On tente d’encadrer les luttes et de les transformer en luttes contre tel ou tel gouvernement, en lutte contre tel ou tel dictateur, contre telle ou telle mesure ou mode de gestion, on tente de transformer les révoltes de notre classe en guerre entre projets bourgeois, de nier tout remise en question de ce système et de phagocyter ainsi tout ce qui s’y oppose. Le summum de cette repolarisation, c’est la guerre impérialiste où la lutte du prolétariat est dévoyée en lutte entre fractions bourgeoises, tel que nous le subissons actuellement en Syrie ou dans d’autres pays durant ces dernières décennies.

Ces caractéristiques et limites des luttes actuelles impliquent que toutes les luttes finissent canalisées, liquidées ou revitalisant le capital. Ceci répand la croyance dans l’impossibilité d’une révolution sociale. Cette croyance se convertit en une force matérielle pour la conservation de ce monde, conduisant bon nombre de ceux qui luttent à se désintéresser de ce qu’exige un processus révolutionnaire international pour se plonger dans une dynamique immédiatiste et localiste sans aucune perspective, ce qui rompt l’unité fondamentale entre les luttes immédiates du prolétariat (lutte contre des mesures d’austérité, contre les expulsions de logements, contre la répression, les expropriations…), et la lutte historique pour la révolution.

Il est certain que les conditions de vie du prolétariat l’amènent dans certaines occasions à dépasser ces obstacles et à s’affirmer en tant que classe, s’opposant violemment à la société actuelle, malgré toutes les faiblesses qui entrave la lutte. Néanmoins, nous arrivons à peine à dépasser le cadre local et ce n’est qu’exceptionnellement qu’est assumé un cadre régional. Le reste du prolétariat mondial ne se sent pas concerné par ces luttes, il n’assume pas la bagarre menée dans tel ou tel autre endroit comme étant sa propre bagarre. C’est ainsi que se développe une infinité de luttes dans un complet isolement, les amenant à finir repolarisées et/ou écrasées par le capital mondial (Syrie, Brésil, Mapuches…). Cette question nous rappelle constamment que notre classe ne peut générer une perspective révolutionnaire qu’en assumant sa lutte sur un plan historico-universel. L’internationalisme prolétarien n’est pas une jolie consigne en l’air mais le terrain même sur lequel se déploie la lutte révolutionnaire.

Malgré toutes ces difficultés, malgré toutes ces forces qui agissent contre la constitution du prolétariat en force révolutionnaire, il n’y a aucune autre perspective. Il n’y a pas d’autre issue à la catastrophe capitaliste que la révolution sociale. Nous n’avons aucun doute sur le fait que la catastrophe capitaliste continue à avancer, rendant toujours plus impossible la vie sur la planète. Nous n’avons également aucun doute sur le fait que les luttes de notre classe continueront à se reproduire çà et là. Ce qui est fondamental n’est toutefois pas de percevoir cette évidence mais d’assumer et de structurer ces luttes comme étant une même lutte internationale pour abattre le capitalisme, utiliser l’expérience historique accumulée pour dépasser nos propres limites et faiblesses ainsi que dénoncer tout ce qui empêche l’action internationale et internationaliste contre le capital et l’État. C’est l’unique voie réelle pour défendre les besoins humains face à ceux du capital. Les réformes, les illusions et espoirs, qui justifient le rejet de la révolution, ne sont rien de plus que des forces de conservation du monde actuel. Nous n’avons d’autre chemin pour sortir de ce fossé que celui de rompre et de dénoncer ces mécanismes de défense du capitalisme qui entravent l’organisation de notre communauté de lutte. S’organiser ensemble, en-dehors et contre toutes les structures de l’Etat, dans la lutte contre ce système de mort, dans la défense intransigeante des besoins humains face à ceux du capital, dans l’affirmation de l’humanité face à la réification capitaliste. Tout le reste, dans cette société, nous conduit vers l’abîme.

L’affirmation de l’être humain face à la déshumanisation absolue que constitue la condition prolétarienne, voilà l’essence de la constitution du prolétariat en classe, pour l’abolition des classes, de l’État et du capital.

Organisons internationalement la lutte de notre classe, contre la catastrophe mondiale du capitalisme, contre toute société de classe !

Prolétaires Internationalistes http://www.proletariosinternacionalistas.org [email protected]

## Třídní válka 08/2018: Proti kapitalistické katastrofě

Bulletin # 08 / 2018 Třídní války. Zdroj: https://www.autistici.org/tridnivalka/tridni-valka-08-2018-proti-kapitalisticke-katastrofe/

Kapitalistická katastrofa se na celém světě projevuje stále intenzivněji a dosahuje rozměrů čím dál tím víc neslučitelných s životem na této planetě. Po celé zeměkouli se šíří válka, masové hladomory, zintenzivňuje se vykořisťování, dochází ke kaskádám sebevražd, komodifikaci všech sociálních vztahů, násilí mezi proletáři a proti proletářům (sexistické a rasistické násilí, násilí na dětech a proti starším…), sledujeme přecpané věznice, ničení Země, jíme stále toxičtější potraviny, ničíme si zdraví atd. Antagonismus mezi kapitalismem a životem se nikdy neprojevoval v tak ničivé podobě. A nikdy také neexistovala tak velká disproporce mezi naléhavou nutností sociální revoluce a tak malým úmyslem tuto nutnost naplnit.

Jediný subjekt schopný vyřešit dnešní problémy prostřednictvím radikální transformace společnosti, tedy proletariát, se jeví neschopný celou tuto katastrofu ukončit. Navzdory tomu, že ji zažívá na vlastní kůži, navzdory tomu, že se znovu a znovu bouří proti svým životním podmínkám a vyvolává společenské výbuchy, které otřásají sociálním smírem tu na tom, tu na onom místě, tak jako v Iránu nebo Nikaragui, navzdory tomu všemu existuje celá řada faktorů, které tomuto subjektu brání, aby se potvrdil jako mezinárodní síla, aby uskutečnil své revoluční řešení oněch obrovských problémů, kterými trpíme.

Desetiletí kontrarevoluce a sociálního smíru proletariát rozdělila a maximalizovala procesy a mechanismy kapitalistické reprodukce, které zakrývají samotnou existenci společenských tříd (především proletariátu), a tak rozdělují jednotnou kritiku, kterou naše třída historicky rozvíjela. Tato kapitalistická totalita, na níž se rozvíjí realita, již žijeme, se jeví roztříštěná řadou ideologií podrobně specifikujících každý problém, který tento systém vytváří, a hledajících konkrétní řešení každého z nich. V důsledku toho vznikají specifická hnutí, která se věnují těmto parciálním problémům a snaží se je vyřešit. Avšak nejen, že neexistuje řešení, které by se mohlo vyrovnat s každým problémem samostatně, ale navíc tato roztříštěnost současně mění i skutečný obsah těchto problémů. Tak byla vytvořena ideologie mužova útlaku ženy, útlaku bílé rasy nad ostatními rasami, ničení přírody lidskou bytostí… a kodifikace skutečnosti pod těmito ideologickými parametry. V boji v rámci jedné parciální kategorie se různá hnutí nacházejí v rovině specifických skupin, které mezi sebou soutěží o větší uznání svých práv ze strany státu. Konkurence mezi zbožím je politicky vyjádřena jako konkurence mezi jednotlivými identitami, a to vše ve prospěch „transverzální“ politiky hodnoty a jejího vládního managementu. Tím je vyloučena jednotná kritika kapitálu, kritika, která obsahuje odsouzení každého jeho aspektu nikoliv jako jisté zvláštnosti, ale jako výrazu celku, který je pro každou svoji část určující, kritika, která zpochybňuje společenský řád, který všechny tyto problémy reprodukuje.

Rozvoj této společnosti je úzce spjat s vývojem izolovaného individua. Společnost zevšeobecněného obchodu vylučuje a v sobě rozpouští jakoukoli jinou komunitu než komunitu peněz a rozvíjí vše, co zvyšuje sociální izolaci. Všechno, co sjednocuje, spojuje v odloučení, to je podstata tohoto světa a jeho způsob života, to je demokracie. Účinek této skutečnosti na lidskou komunitu ničí její sociální povahu a atomizuje ji na izolované jedince s protichůdnými zájmy. A tento efekt se stále zhoršuje. Občan je dnes zářným příkladem toho, jak se obchodní rozvoj a izolovaný člověk objevují v paralelní podobě. Tento vývoj nejen brutálně neguje lidské společenství, ale představuje obrovskou překážku v boji proti kapitalismu, protože potvrzení onoho individua směřuje proti rozvoji organizace jediné komunity stojící proti kapitálu, komunity boje, která vychází z kolektivního bytí revoluční společenské třídy, proletariátu.

V tomto kontextu má proletariát obrovský problém jednat a rozpoznat sám sebe jako třídu. Samotné jeho bytí, stejně jako bohatý historický proces jeho boje a jeho programu je v historii zcela popřen, ať už prostřednictvím deformování nebo zamlčování této historické reality.

Dynamika samotného kapitálu a jeho ideologických sil vytváří společenskou činnost, v níž je naše třída jako subjekt popírána a redukována na to, čím je v procesu produkce a reprodukce kapitálu, na to čím údajně bude věčně: na prostý objekt kapitálu, prostou obchodní pracovní sílu, kterou lze využít nebo zlikvidovat podle potřeb výroby, na prostého diváka běhu věcí.

Právě tato skutečnost znamená, že samotní proletáři se považují za všechno možné, jen ne za proletáře. Jedni se domnívají, že nejsou proletáři, protože jsou zaměstnanci, jiní věří, že jimi nejsou proto, že jsou nezaměstnaní, další se cítí být zemědělci stojící v opozici vůči dělníkům, ještě další mají za to, že jsou obchodníci, protože prodávají zboží po domech, a mnozí jiní si myslí, že jsou příliš mladí nebo příliš staří na to, aby byli proletáři. Některé ženy se cítí otázkou třídy méně dotčené než muži a další považují za určující spíše rasový útlak než třídu a místo toho, aby se cítili jako černí, latinsko-američtí nebo asijští proletáři, považují se prostě za černé, Latinoameričany, nebo Asijce. Pro ty, kteří překonali tyto nejzákladnější formy bezprostřední negace proletářské reality, existují jiné, více politicko-ideologické formy té stejné negace jako jsou „antiimperialistický“, „antineoliberální“, „palestinský“, „židovský“, „kubánský“, „levičácký“, „francouzský“, „yankeeovský“, „aymarský“, „kurdský“, či „chorvatský“ sentiment, identity jako „dělník prvního světa“, „feminismus“, „antirasismus“ atd.

Tyto koncepce identit představují sociálně-demokratické síly, které se staví proti procesu ustavování proletariátu jako třídy, jež se postaví proti katastrofě tohoto světa. Pojetí třídy je zde zředěno v propletenci identit a fiktivních komunit, které jsou včleněny do komunity peněz.

Politika je zároveň jednou z hlavních ideologií proti naší třídě. Otázku sociální transformace omezuje na obsazení státu, buďto volební cestou nebo násilím, s cílem implantovat řadu opatření, která „by zpochybnila kapitalistickou společnost“ a nabídla „skutečnou a okamžitou alternativu“. Stát však není neutrálním orgánem, který může být používán podle vůle tohoto či onoho vůdce nebo strany. Je to organizace síly současné společnosti, a tedy kapitálu, a kdokoli se tohoto státu zmocní, musí jednat v kapitalistickém rámci. Stát nelze řídit, lze jím pouze být řízen. Všechna politická opatření nejsou ničím jiným, než různými formami rozvoje kapitálu, které nezpochybňují žádný ze základů této společnosti, ani nepředstavují žádný druh skutečné alternativy. Podívejte se na Kubu, Venezuelu nebo na současný postup stoupenců nezávislosti v Katalánsku.

Samospráva je prezentována jako alternativa k politice, není to však nic víc než její replika ve sféře výroby. Pokud politika všechno redukuje pouze na veřejnou sféru, pak samospráva dělá totéž ve sféře produktivní, snaží se změnit svět bez zničení moci, vyzývá výrobce, aby převzali výrobní prostředky tak, jak existují, a dál jich užívali bez šéfů a bez buržoazie. Ale tato „alternativa“ udržuje společenskou základnu kapitalismu neporušenou, protože na jejím základě dál pokračuje rozvoj autonomních jednotek komoditní výroby, výměny, peněz (nebo „kupónů“) a tudíž kapitálu, vykořisťování a všech základních kategorií této společnosti. Domnívat se, že vykořisťování a kapitalistický útisk vychází od jednotlivých buržujů, znamená nechápat, že buržoazie je jen funkcionářem kapitálu, že je to kapitál jako „automatický subjekt“, kdo řídí výrobu. Argentinské zkušenosti z počátku 21. století s „převzetím“ továren a další podobné, současnější zkušenosti jako je Rojava a její družstva, ukazují, jak může samospráva zlikvidovat náš boj a dodat kapitalistické ekonomice novou sílu. Samospráva stejně jako politika nechává neporušený kapitalistický společenský vztah, který musí být zničen.

Pro zachování této společnosti je samozřejmě také důležité, abychom věřili, že my všichni, kdo zažíváme současné strašlivé životní podmínky, si můžeme vybrat menší zlo. Vždycky se najde něco horšího, něco, co odůvodňuje podrobení se současné společnosti, více či méně kritickou podporu představitelů kapitálu nebo vzdání boje za nějaké drobky ze stolu buržoazie. Tomu, kdo žije v dusivém kapitalistickém sociálním smíru, ukazují hrůzy války. Těm, kteří nechávají svůj život v práci, aby se mohli najíst, ukazují hladovějící nezaměstnané bez jakýchkoli zdrojů. Těm, kteří chtějí jednat mimo a proti politické hře odborů, vychvalují to, „jak dělat politiku jinak“, bezchybnost „přímé demokracie“. Těm, kteří zpochybňují levici, ukazují, jak špatná je pravice. Dalším říkají, že demokracie je lepší než diktatura, ty, kteří bojují, podněcují k tomu, aby svůj boj opustili poté, co obdrželi nějaké drobné ústupky… Tak skrývají, že všechno tvoří část toho samého, že jsou to jednotlivé okamžiky té samé existence, součást námezdní práce, peněz a hodnoty.

Tam, kde se proletáři vzbouřili a vydali se do boje proti peklu, ve kterém žijí, tak jako v nedávných bojích v Nikaragui nebo v Iránu, se globální kapitál snaží popřít revoluční perspektivu a podstrčit do boje kapitalistickou perspektivu ve všech jejích variantách. Snaží se boje uzavřít do sebe a přeměnit na boje proti této či oné vládě, tomu nebo onomu diktátorovi, proti takovému nebo makovému opatření nebo dohodě, pokouší se přeměnit vzpouru naší třídy na válku mezi jednotlivými buržoazními projekty, popřít veškeré zpochybnění tohoto systému a tak absorbovat všechno, co je proti němu. Nejvyšším stupněm této repolarizace je imperialistická válka, v níž je boj proletariátu odveden do boje mezi buržoazními frakcemi, stejně jako se to v současnosti děje v Sýrii, a stejně jako se to v posledních desetiletích dělo v jiných zemích.

Z těchto faktorů a limitů současných bojů vyplývá, že všechny boje končí tím, že jsou usměrněny, zlikvidovány nebo samy oživí kapitál. To dále rozšiřuje víru v nemožnost sociální revoluce. Tato víra se stává hmotnou silou pro zachování tohoto světa a vede mnohé bojující proletáře k tomu, aby ustoupili z toho, co požaduje mezinárodní revoluční proces, a aby se ponořili do posibilistické a lokalistické dynamiky bez jakékoliv perspektivy, která narušuje jednotu mezi bezprostředními boji naší třídy (boj proti úsporným opatřením, proti vystěhovávání, proti represím, vyvlastnění…) a historickým bojem za revoluci.

Je jisté, že životní podmínky proletariátu ho přiměly k tomu, aby tyto překážky opakovaně překonával a potvrzoval sám sebe jako třídu, která se násilně staví proti současné společnosti, a to navzdory všem svým slabinám. Místní rámec byl nicméně překonán jen zřídka a pouze výjimečně se proletariát propojil na regionální úrovni. Zbytku celosvětového proletariátu jako by se tyto boje netýkaly, jako by boj, který se rozvíjí na jednom či na jiném místě, nechápal jako svůj vlastní. Nekonečné množství bojů se tak rozvíjí v úplné izolaci a končí depolarizované a/nebo rozdrcené globálním kapitálem (Sýrie, Brazílie, Mapuches…). Tato otázka nám nepřetržitě připomíná, že naše třída může vytvořit revoluční perspektivu pouze tak, že se do svého boje pustí na historicko-univerzální rovině. Proletářský internacionalismus není nějakým líbivým heslem minulosti, ale je to samotný terén, na němž se revoluční boj rozvíjí.

Navzdory všem těmto obtížím, navzdory všem těmto silám a prvkům, které působí proti ustavení proletariátu jako revoluční síly, neexistuje žádná jiná perspektiva, žádné jiné dveře vedoucí z kapitalistické katastrofy, než sociální revoluce. Nepochybujeme o tom, že kapitalistická katastrofa bude i nadále postupovat a že život na této planetě bude stále méně možný. Ale nepochybujeme ani o tom, že boje naší třídy se budou objevovat na všech možných místech této planety. Co je však zásadní, není vnímat tuto jasnou skutečnost, nýbrž se do těchto bojů pustit a strukturovat je jako jeden stejný mezinárodní boj za svržení kapitalismu, využívat nahromaděné historické zkušenosti k tomu, abychom překonali naše vlastní limity a slabiny a také odsoudit vše, co brání internacionální a internacionalistické akci proti kapitálu a státu. To je jediná skutečná cesta, jak bránit lidské potřeby vůči kapitálu. Reformy, naděje a sny, které ospravedlňují odmítnutí revoluce, nejsou ničím jiným než silami za zachování současného světa. Z této jámy lvové se vyhrabeme jedině tak, že tyto mechanismy na obrany kapitalismu, které brání organizaci naší komunity boje, odsoudíme a rozbijeme. Že se budeme sami organizovat – mimo a proti všem strukturám státu – v boji proti tomuto systému, na obranu lidských potřeb proti potřebám kapitálu. Že se přihlásíme k lidskosti proti kapitalistickému zpředmětňování. Všechno ostatní nás dovede do propasti, do které nás tato společnost směřuje.

Potvrzení lidské bytosti proti absolutní dehumanizaci, která tvoří životní podmínky proletariátu, to je podstata ustavení proletariátu jako třídy, která popře všechny společenské třídy, stát a kapitál.

Organizujme boj naší třídy mezinárodně, proti globální katastrofě kapitalismu, proti celé společnosti tříd!

Internacionalističtí proletáři http://www.proletariosinternacionalistas.org [email protected]

[Read original on libcom.org](https://libcom.org/article/class-war-082018-against-capitalist-catastrophe)
