---
title: "How Technology is Rewriting the Way We Write"
author: "Danica Tomber"
source: "Counterpunch"
url: "https://www.counterpunch.org/2026/07/21/how-technology-is-rewriting-the-way-we-write/"
---

The manuscript pages of James Joyce&#8217;s Ulysses with the original text in ink and Joyce&#8217;s edits in crayon. When was the last time you wrote something by hand? Was it a stylus signature at a checkout stand, a kitchen calendar reminder, or a note jotted down on a scrap of paper? These days, writing largely lives in the digital realm. Despite its advantages, handwriting has been pushed to the fringes of everyday life. Historian Christine Rosen, author of The Extinction of Experience , explains that handwriting is a vital embodied experience that allows us to make sense of our world. In a Guardian article, Rosen points to calligraphist Bernard Maisner, who “argues that calligraphy, and handwriting more broadly, is ‘not meant to reproduce something over and over again. It’s meant to show the humanity, the responsiveness and variation within.’” Is the decline of handwriting an inevitable loss or a harmless evolution? To answer this question, we trace the historical significance of handwriting, investigate its cognitive impact, reflect on its cultural meaning, and explore its future relevance. A Brief History of Handwriting Unlike speech, which is an innate capability of the human brain, writing is an invention. Just like modern digital tools, such as computers and the internet, writing systems—from logographic to alphabetic—were invented, albeit thousands of years ago. The oldest form of writing known to us is cuneiform , a script developed in Mesopotamia (present-day Iraq) around 3400 to 3300 BCE, with Egyptian hieroglyphs likely following around 3000 BCE. Although cuneiform was most commonly imprinted on clay, Egyptian hieroglyphs appeared on a variety of media—carved on stone and written in ink on papyrus. Much later, in medieval Europe, scribes trained on wax tablets before moving on to parchment as they learned textualis , a Gothic writing style. Throughout history, writing has maintained an aesthetic component. From calligraphy to Spencerian script , penmanship is a form of artistic expression that encourages writers to wield their creativity to capture detail, contrast, curvature, and negative space. In describing Platt Rogers Spencer’s inspiration for Spencerian script, master penman Michael Sull says : You should be able to create visible language on paper that has so much personal expression that whoever reads it could understand how you felt, what you meant. Because everybody is different, it allowed people to write the way they wanted to write. Other techniques prioritized function over form. The Palmer Method , first proposed in 1894, facilitated speed, legibility, and ease through fluid arm movements rather than finger movement, making it a helpful method for people with fine motor challenges. Around the same time as the introduction of the Palmer Method, a new technology was transforming the world, ushering in a significant shift from handwriting to typing. With the typewriter , speed and efficiency were prioritized yet again—this time to meet the demands of industrial growth. But within a century, typewriters were surmounted by word processors and digital computers, solving several issues, including the ability to revise, store, and share written information more easily. In the 21st century, mobile technologies have come to dominate; people now use laptops, tablets, and smartphones to type. Handwriting and the Brain On the surface, the written word is valued for its role in sharing and recording information, but it serves a multitude of cognitive functions. In addition to improving fine motor skills, writing by hand stimulates greater comprehension and neural connectivity. A 2024 study published in Frontiers in Psychology found that, compared to typewriting, handwriting showed more “widespread brain connectivity” in areas associated with learning and memory. Speaking about the study, neuroscientist Ramesh Balasubramaniam told Science News , “It shows that there’s more involvement of these brain regions when you’re handwriting, which might give you some specific advantages.” He added that the reasons for these differences in brain activity warrant further research—an opinion echoed in a 2025 commentary on the study. A greater understanding of these mechanisms will also better inform educational policy. Handwriting’s link to literacy is another reason why researchers recommend that early childhood education programs include handwriting instruction. A 2025 study published in the Journal of Experimental Child Psychology revealed that the development of reading skills is critically dependent on handwriting. “[T]he physical act of forming letters by hand enhances the mental representation of those letters. Writing by hand involves coordinated movements, attention to shape, and sensorimotor feedback—all of which seem to reinforce learning. Typing, by contrast, requires only pressing a key, which may not engage the same cognitive or neural processes,” states a PsyPost article, referring to the findings of the 2025 study. Literacy encompasses a range of skills, from letter formation and spelling to reading and writing. Although handwriting is typically thought of as a single skill, research indicates that it is a combination of two separate but related skills: fluency (how quickly and smoothly someone writes) and legibility (how well it can be deciphered). Beyond practical benefits, handwriting cultivates creativity. A 2025 meta-analysis on the role of handwriting in education, published in the International Organization of Scientific Research Journal of Humanities and Social Science , explains that “the slower, more deliberate pace of handwriting promotes creative thinking by allowing time for careful consideration, allowing ideas to flow more easily, and connecting disparate thoughts.” The researchers who conducted this analysis, Drishya Sasidharan and Suphala Kotian of Srinivas University, India, contend that handwriting “promotes creativity and personal expression by allowing for a distinct, individualised style that expresses emotion and closeness in communication.” But putting pen to paper often poses challenges in the classroom. Sasidharan and Kotian advise a complementary strategy that blends handwriting with digital technologies. For example, teachers can foster creativity by using interactive whiteboards for brainstorming or by having students write stories by hand that can then be animated or videotaped for self-expression. When it comes to the brain, handwriting has ties to fine motor skills, memory, attention, creativity, self-expression, and the development of literacy. Although more research is needed, many experts agree that the best approach in classrooms is to ensure a balance between handwriting and digital technologies. Is Handwriting on the Decline? Designing educational policies that strike the right balance with technology is no easy task, especially in a digitally dominant world where mobile phones proliferate. Smartphones, tablets, and laptops abound in classrooms and offices. A 2024 report by the London School of Economics and Political Science on the use of smartphones in schools emphasizes the need to distinguish between smartphone bans and restrictions, with the latter offering a more nuanced and holistic approach that better addresses children’s educational needs, safety, mental health, and social well-being. The report explains that when we talk about a “ban,” we tend to close down constructive discussions about what is best for kids and let “profit-hungry” tech companies “off the hook.” “Rather than restricting children’s activities, we should be demanding firmer action from government and regulators, so that children can benefit safely from the digital world, especially at a time when AI is becoming embedded into every area of public and private life.” With advancements in computer technology in the 21st century, handwriting has been overtaken by typing to the point where many schools have dropped cursive instruction and focused on keyboard skills. In the US, curricula experienced major changes with the 2010 adoption of the Common Core State Standards Initiative , marking a historic shift in American education. This initiative included keyboarding as a curricular requirement in K–12 education, but not cursive. As of 2026, however, 27 states have passed laws reinstating the requirement for cursive instruction. Cursive writing is integral to understanding and ensuring a connection to our past. “We may never return to a time when cursive was the default way of writing, but its resurgence suggests that we are not ready to let go of it entirely. Cursive endures as a bridge between past and present, history and memory, function and art,” states Bess Lovejoy in History Facts . Meanwhile, global trends indicate a decline in handwriting. “In 2015, the Finnish government announced a new policy phasing out teaching cursive handwriting in favour of keyboard skills,” reports an article from the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ). Government officials reasoned that “handwriting is no longer as valuable to kids.” In the digital age, younger generations experience writing differently. In a 2024 interview with Türkiye Today , Nedret Öztokat Kılıçeri, professor at Istanbul University, stated that many students’ “handwriting is often unreadable.” She added, “While some students may have neat handwriting, they struggle to communicate effectively. The use of test-based assessments and constant social media interaction has contributed to this. They avoid long sentences and often fail to write proper paragraphs.” The implications of the decline in handwriting instruction extend beyond aesthetics and legibility, affecting the length and complexity of writing. Handwriting may be on the decline, but educational curricula, in an effort to find the right balance, seem to be adjusting earlier changes that placed more emphasis on the digital end of the scale. Educators and policymakers recognize that the benefits of handwriting should be weighed alongside the benefits of new technology. Cultural and Social Implications Global efforts are underway to protect and revitalize the craft of handwriting. The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization’s Intangible Cultural Heritage (UNESCO ICH) list emphasizes the importance of safeguarding nonphysical cultural artifacts such as oral traditions, rituals, and other social practices, including handwriting, especially for minority communities. The UNESCO ICH committee inscribed Mongolian calligraphy in 2013 on the “List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding,” while adding three Georgian language alphabets in 2016 and Arabic calligraphy in 2021 to the “ Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity .” At the local level, handwriting specialist Gwen Dornan, author of Writing Left-Handed , recommends handwriting competitions to guard against the loss of the craft while also meeting students’ classroom needs. “Entering a handwriting competition is not going to solve all these problems but it can provide a focus on the skill of handwriting and spark a few weeks of concentrated effort throughout the school that can raise the whole level of competence.” In letters, diaries, journals, and notes, handwriting is an expression of the writer’s inner world. This is why historians value these sources: they reveal a deeper and more nuanced understanding of past events than facts and figures alone can provide. Firsthand accounts of events allow us to more intimately understand how people experienced them, acting as windows to their thoughts, feelings, and decisions. The Smithsonian Transcription Center protects the cultural heritage of handwritten documents through its “volunpeer” program, a citizen project that digitizes historical archives. Volunteers transcribe handwriting in government records from the post-Civil War Freedmen’s Bureau, science notebooks produced by Women Astronomical Computers and astronomers at the Harvard College Observatory, and travel diaries about art and design from the Hewitt sisters, “who traveled extensively collecting objects highlighting art and design in the early 20th century,” making these cultural artifacts digitally accessible and searchable. The evolution of signatures , which have long been used to authenticate social contracts, offers another window into our changing society. For ages, people have trusted signatures to validate business deals and legal proceedings. In the digital age, signatures have not only transitioned from ink to stylus; they also exist as strings of numbers, letters, or a combination of both. Does this reflect a society that prioritizes efficiency, security, and accessibility over personal expression? Maybe. Although handwritten notes have largely been replaced by instant messages in casual conversation, the latter incorporates emoticons, emojis, and GIFs—digital expressions that draw on the richness of human expression. Can Technology Replace Handwriting? As the digital world grows, handwriting has faded from many parts of everyday life. Emails have replaced handwritten correspondence; text messages have replaced Post-it notes; digital journals have replaced paper journals; and grocery lists have also gone digital. These technologies emphasize speed and convenience, which have their advantages, but can they replace handwriting—or should they? While researchers are still exploring the benefits of handwriting, especially for learning and memory, they agree that one mode should not be completely replaced by the other. Instead, digital writing and handwriting should be integrated. In a 2024 study published in Frontiers in Psychology , professors Ruud Van der Weel and Audrey Van der Meer of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology “urge that children, from an early age, must be exposed to handwriting activities in school to establish the neuronal connectivity patterns that provide the brain with optimal conditions for learning.” They concede, however, that “although it is vital to maintain handwriting practice at school, it is also important to keep up with continuously developing technological advances.” Meta-analyses of the handwriting research landscape, such as a 2023 article published in Children , a journal of the Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI), and a 2025 article published in Life (MDPI) , echo this need for a hybrid approach. The team behind the 2023 research review suggests that hardware—such as tablets, styluses, and virtual reality devices—can be combined with software, such as AI programs and mobile apps, to create more targeted handwriting instruction for children in both educational and therapeutic settings. The benefits of this method include AI’s ability to individualize plans for different learner needs and digital evaluations that help professionals quantify handwriting abilities (pen/stylus pressure, letter spacing, handwriting speed, stroke shape, etc.). The big challenge, however, lies in garnering acceptance from all users—children, families, teachers, and rehab professionals. AI is one technology in particular that has been met with skepticism. On the industry front, an article in PC Tech magazine points out that it should be actively consulted as a collaborator rather than passively used as a generator. Although AI can enhance productivity, the power still rests with human creativity and critical thinking. In many environments, technology has pushed handwriting to the margins. But experts and professionals caution against viewing this as a debate of one or the other. The consensus is that technological advancements should augment rather than replace handwriting. Handwriting’s End—and Its Survivals In our everyday lives, handwriting has certainly become less common. Compared with the practicality and convenience of keyboards and screens, its purposes might seem more archaic. So, where does it have a place now? From a creative standpoint, handwriting survives in calligraphy, personal journaling, and artisanal stationery. Even when calligraphy first came up against the efficiency of movable-type printing in 11th-century China and 15th-century Europe , it established its value through the preservation of artistry, self-expression, and individuality. Today, handwriting leans on those same values in the wake of the digital age. In a 2025 interview with Forbes , Giuseppe Aquila, CEO of the long-standing fountain pen company Montegrappa, reflected , “In an increasingly digital world, the act of writing by hand has become a powerful symbol of authenticity and intention.” Handwriting also serves as a mindfulness practice. Calligrapher Barbara Bash writes that when a person slows down to feel the texture of the paper, the pen in their hand, and how it glides across the paper, it leads them to enter a meditative state—one where there is a sense of groundedness, connection to the present, and deepened thought—which acts as a counterbalance to the speed of our digital lives. In the vernacular of technology, we often talk about haptics—the tactile experience of interacting with devices—but handwriting, especially as Bash describes it, is the original haptics. For those who prefer a hybrid approach, various note-taking apps simulate handwriting. Writers can choose from an array of features, including searchability, editability, collaboration, and pen options such as ink color, line thickness, and stylus sensitivity. Digital handwriting fonts offer another way to leverage electronic writing while exercising individual expression. Handwriting’s Place in the Future Will handwriting ever disappear completely? Experts speculate that its contributions to our lives—in cognition, art, and authenticity—still grant it a place at the table. According to a 2017 BBC article , Anne Trubek, author of The History and Uncertain Future of Handwriting , “doesn’t believe it will die out for a very long time, ‘if ever,’” but there remains a complex interplay between the rise of text communication adeptness, the importance of heritage preservation, and the meaningfulness of “personal touch.” As with all technological advances, there is a tension between progress and preservation. The new often swoops in to offer us convenience, efficiency, and greater productivity. The old reminds us that faster is not always better. Handwriting is more than a tool for communication. It’s a cultural heritage, a way of expressing one’s identity. It helps us organize and process our thoughts. It offers a way to slow down in a busy world and attune to the present moment. Compared with the past, handwriting has clearly declined, but it doesn’t seem likely to vanish in the future. After all, it has survived other advancements such as movable type, the typewriter, mechanical keyboards, and digital touchscreens. Just as it has for centuries, it will likely adapt to new technologies. Society will continue to make technological advancements, but putting pen to paper offers us a way to stay connected to our humanity. This article was produced for the Observatory by the Independent Media Institute. It is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License ( CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 ). Leemu Muniyath provided research support. The post How Technology is Rewriting the Way We Write appeared first on CounterPunch.org .