---
title: "Announcing the 2026 Grant Cycle – Applications Now Open!"
author: "Wrong Kind of Green"
source: "Institute for Anarchist Studies"
url: "https://anarchiststudies.org/grant-announcement-2026/"
---

CALL FOR APPLICATIONS, 2025-2026 Anarchist Horizons Grant and Jen Angel Anarchist Media Grant Grants for Writers, Artists, Organizers, and Mediamakers About the Grants For nearly thirty years, the IAS has funded creative intellectual work that furthers anarchist ideas and makes them accessible to a broad audience. Since 2023, we’ve collaborated with Agency to offer two grant programs: the Anarchist Horizons Grant and the Jen Angel Anarchist Media Grant. The Anarchist Horizons grant program supports a variety of radical projects, including written works, translations, artwork, performance, workshops, and events. The Jen Angel Anarchist Media grant program, named in honor of the late anarchist media activist Jen Angel , supports multimedia projects that help translate anarchist ideas and practices for the general public. We typically award several micro-grants ($300-$1500), prioritizing smaller proposals so that we can fund multiple projects each year. Priority is given to creators who are BIPOC, queer and trans/nonbinary, low-income, currently or formerly incarcerated, and/or working outside of academia. Submissions from applicants outside of the United States are welcome. In general, our grant programs aim to support work that is focused on the following projects: Preserving movement memory and recent history Reflecting on forgotten or buried histories Developing anarchist theory, including on economics Making previously inaccessible anarchist materials available in translation Building anarchist infrastructure and radical alternatives Uplifting on-the-ground projects and models of success Addressing key anarchist concepts for popular audiences Reaching children and younger people Imagining transformative futures Note that if proposing an event or workshop, the proceedings should be filmed, recorded, or otherwise made sharable. Topics for This Year’s Applications For the 2026 Anarchist Horizons Grant , we are specifically looking for works that take an intersectional anarchist approach and that highlight the following topics: Reflections on anarchism (in all its forms, with and without the label) as well as resistance to fascism, genocide, and ecocide Radical visions for a better future and the theories and actions to help us get there Reportbacks from on-the-ground efforts on successes, challenges, and needs Stories, narratives, and histories, connecting our past, present, and future movements Anti-fascism, immigration, and migrant justice The Jen Angel Anarchist Media Grant was founded in 2023 in memory of Jen Angel, long-time anarchist and independent media activist. Organized by Agency and the Institute for Anarchist Studies, this grant specifically supports multimedia projects that seek to make anarchist ideas accessible to the general public. Examples of media projects designed in this spirit, include: It Did Happen Here Podcast “We’re All We’ve Got, We’re All We Need” | Mutual Aid Disaster Relief “What is the State?” | AK Press/Agency Application Guidelines and Preparation For our applications, we use an online submission form. We recommend preparing all required materials in advance of beginning the online application. You will need to succinctly summarize your project, audience, and outreach plan, as well as provide a budget and timeline for completion. Please pay careful attention to character limits. For further guidance, we recommend reading the Grants FAQ and our guide on “How to Apply for a Grant” (also available in a more accessible format ) before beginning your application. Applicants will be asked to specify which grant program they wish to be considered for, either the Anarchist Horizons Grant or the Jen Angel Anarchist Media Grant. Applications can only be submitted for one grant program per application form, though applicants may submit multiple forms. For more information on the Horizons Grant, contact us at info@anarchiststudies.org and for the Jen Angel Anarchist Media Grant, contact: coordinator@anarchistagency.com Applications opened December 1st, 2025 and will close March 2nd, 2026. All applicants will be notified of a decisions on or before June 8th, 2026, and will be expected to respond accepting the grant by June 22nd, 2026. You can access the online application form here . Thanks for your interest and we look forward to reading this year’s applications! &nbsp;