---
title: "Announcing the 2025 IAS Anarchist Horizons Grantees"
author: "Wrong Kind of Green"
source: "Institute for Anarchist Studies"
url: "https://anarchiststudies.org/2025-ias-grantees/"
---

The Institute for Anarchist Studies is thrilled to announce the projects awarded with an Anarchist Horizons grant during our 2025 grant cycle. &nbsp; BREACH: a digest of operational theory for the party of anarchy by BREACH editors Out of the impasses of tactics and the impossibility of true strategy, the operational emerges. BREACH aims to demystify the radical uses and potent intersections of operational theory and anti-colonial war so that we can sharpen our analyses and practices. From blitzkrieg to counterinsurgency, modern militaries have often wrestled with questions of coordination and coherence in the absence of conventional command—the very dilemmas many radicals face today—our aim, in part, is to learn from their grapplings without reproducing their ends. The BREACH editors are an ecumenical assembly of wannabe anarchists, communists, and social revolutionaries who love our shared potential as much as we hate the state and capitalism. Many of us first encountered operational theory in a Collective Strategy study group in Olympia, WA, over seven years ago. Others we found, or found us, along the way. &nbsp; Searching for Ray Jones by JM Wong Searching for Ray Jones and his transnational organizing in multiethnic left anarchist spaces in San Francisco Chinatown is an attempt to rebraid a transpacific anarchist and anti-state communist political ancestry. Asian Americans today deserve more than the binaries of state communism or US imperialist and assimilationist politics as our political homes. Ray Jones in the 1920s represents an era of dynamic left liberatory thought that offers a tradition and lineage for us today. JM Wong (they/them) is a queer child of the Chinese diaspora living on Duwamish lands (Seattle) via Malaysia/Singapore and many cities in between. They write about movements, desire, and longings across distances and bordered spaces. Of diaspora, of the logistical supply chain stretching over ocean waters, of connections transcending prison walls, of crossings over to the ancestral realms. What we each journey through matters, and the futures we imagine begin from now. &nbsp; The Wildflower that Grew Beneath the Bottom of the Concrete SHU by Malik Muhammad Anarchist antifascist political prisoner Malik Muhammad is releasing a compilation book of poetry started and written mostly over the course of his two-week hunger strike during which he was deprived of everything and subjected to torturous conditions while in solitary confinement. His book reflects his political, social and revolutionary views. &#8220;The Wildflower that Grew Beneath the Bottom of the Concrete SHU&#8221; will be a compilation of poetry from a Black radical antifascist anarchist under duress &#8211; but staying strong and finding his escape through the sentences he creates. Malik Muhammad is an antifascist anarchist, a father, a partner, a queer revolutionary, a lover of all arts, poetry, music, and drawing. He loves flowers and is a staunch abolitionist and writer. He looks mean and tough, but that&#8217;s only to fascists who threaten the ones he loves and their right to &#8220;BE&#8221;. He&#8217;s really a teddy bear whose favorite flower is a primrose (which means both childhood and inconsistency &#8211; aptly describing his upbringing). &nbsp; Interviews with Ekita Yukiko & Devran of Antifa Gençlik by Pass on Press Grant funds will go towards publishing two new interviews in zine format, with comrades whose words are being translated into English for the first time. The first zine will feature Japanese anarchist Ekita Yukiko san of the Anti-Japan East Asia Armed Front (later Japanese Red Army), who was recently released from prison after 20 years of incarceration for her role in the 1974 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries bombing. The second will feature Devran of Antifa Gençlik, a Berlin based formation of migrant youth active from the end of the 1980’s who were greatly influenced by antifascist Turkish formations like Devrimci Yol. Pass on Press is an independent, self-organized guerrilla publishing group and front for various other projects of the radical imagination based in Berlin, Germany. &nbsp; Southern Solidarity Presents: A filmed virtual Conversation with Joy James and William C. Anderson by Southern Solidarity Southern Solidarity presents a dynamic virtual event exploring anarchist thought, histories of resistance, and radical visions for collective liberation. In this event, Southern Solidarity organizers will be in dialogue with Joy James and William Anderson hoping to connect abolitionist legacies to today’s struggles against fascism, genocide, and ecocide. Jasmine Araujo is a writer and member of Southern Solidarity, a grassroots mutual aid network originally based in the U.S. South, with an additional branch in New York. For the past five years, Southern Solidarity members have been consistently providing weekly direct relief to houseless people — including food, hygiene supplies, and other essential items. Beyond direct service, the organization also actively organizes alongside houseless communities to resist harmful policies such as police sweeps and criminalization of poverty. Araujo’s work reflects a deep commitment to confronting systemic injustice. Southern Solidarity operates from an abolitionist, anti-capitalist framework that centers the autonomy and dignity of houseless individuals. Its model seeks not only to meet immediate needs but to rupture systems of oppression at their root. If you would like to be informed about future grant opportunities, please make sure to subscribe to our newsletter or follow us on social media. You can find the links along the right side of this page. We will announce it as soon as applications for the next grant cycle are being accepted! &nbsp;