---
title: "Announcing Our 2024-2025 Grant Cycle – Applications Now Open!"
author: "Wrong Kind of Green"
source: "Institute for Anarchist Studies"
url: "https://anarchiststudies.org/grant-announcement-2025/"
---

Announcing Our 2024-2025 Grant Cycle – Applications Now Open! The Institute for Anarchist Studies is excited to announce that applications are now open for our 2024-2025 grant cycle. For nearly thirty years, the IAS has funded creative intellectual work that furthers anarchist ideas and makes them accessible to a broad audience. Since 2023, we’ve collaborated with Anarchist Agency to offer two grant programs: the Anarchist Horizons Grant and the Jen Angel Anarchist Media Grant. The Anarchist Horizons grant program supports a variety of radical projects, including written works, translations, artwork, performance, workshops, and events. The JAAMG grant program, named in honor of the late anarchist media activist Jen Angel , supports multimedia projects that help translate anarchist ideas and practices for the general public. You can find specific information about this year’s call for submissions on our website, including topics we’re prioritizing in our granting this year, but in general our organization remains dedicated to funding projects that are: Preserving movement memory and recent history Reflecting on forgotten or buried histories Developing anarchist theory, including on economics Making previously inaccessible anarchist materials available in translation Building anarchist infrastructure and radical alternatives Uplifting on-the-ground projects and models of success Addressing key anarchist concepts for popular audiences Reaching children and younger people Imagining transformative futures We typically award several grant requests between $300 and $1500, prioritizing smaller proposals so that we can fund multiple projects each year. Priority is given to creators who are BIPOC, queer and trans/nonbinary, currently incarcerated, low-income, and/or working outside of academia. We also welcome submissions from applicants located outside of the United States. You can see examples of past grantees for the Anarchist Horizons grant program here and for the JAAMG grant program here . We’ve created materials to help you submit the strongest application possible, including: Call for Applications How to Apply Guide General FAQ Grant Spotlights Please take a look at these materials, which include guidelines for submission, a checklist for preparing your application, and specific information about our selection process. For questions or further guidance, please feel free to reach out to us via either info@anarchiststudies.org for the Anarchist Horizons Grant Program) or coordinator@anarchistangecy.com for the JAAMG grant program. Applications open November 30 th , 2024 and close March 31 st , 2025. All applicants will be notified of a decisions on or before June 30 th , 2025. You can access the online application form here . Thanks for your interest and we look forward to reading this year’s applications!