---
title: "Announcing the 2025 Running Down the Walls in Brooklyn, NY"
author: "It's Going Down"
source: "It's Going Down"
url: "https://itsgoingdown.org/announcing-the-2025-running-down-the-walls-in-brooklyn-ny/"
---

Announcing the 2025 Running Down the Walls event in Brooklyn, NY. For more Running Down the Walls events, go here . WHAT :&nbsp; Running Down the Walls &nbsp;&ndash; 5k Run/Walk/Jog/Bike/Hang WHEN : 2:00-7:00pm, Sunday, September 21st, 2025 WHERE : Prospect Park&ndash; Lincoln Road/East Lake Drive, east of the Terrace Bridge (see the below map for exact location) COST : $ 20 &nbsp;registration, participants encouraged to get sponsors (includes vegan BBQ afterwards, with COVID precautions for serving!) Donate at paypal.me/nycabc or venmo.com/nycabc NYC Anarchist Black Cross (NYC ABC) is excited to announce Running Down the Walls 2025&ndash;the 26th Anniversary of Running Down the Walls since it was started by ABCF-LA. We are looking very forward to gathering as a community. For the last couple of years, we&rsquo;ve had an amazing time and successful fundraisers. Please stay tuned to our website, sign up for our newsletter, and follow us on instagram (@ nycabc ) or bluesky ( nycabc.bsky.social ) for updates. Every year, prisoners and supporters of political prisoners organize solidarity events with Running Down the Walls. In previous years, we&rsquo;ve had runs in Albuquerque (NM), Arcata (CA), Ashland (OR), Bellefonte (PA), Boston (MA), Buffalo (NY), Chico (CA), Denver (CO), Elmore (AL), Inez (KY), Los Angeles (CA), Marion (IL), Minneapolis (MN) New York (NY), USP Navosta (TX), Pelican Bay (CA), Phoenix (AZ), Tucson (AZ), Seattle (WA), and Toronto, Ontario. This year we hope to expand the amount of runs in prisons and other cities, as well as increase the amount of funds raised for community projects.&nbsp; NYC ABC &lsquo;s goal with this year&rsquo;s run is $4,500. You can donate online by going to venmo.com/nycabc : @nycabc This year&rsquo;s run will take place on Sunday, September 21st, 2025 at 2:00 pm in solidarity and conjunction with runs that will take place in cities and prison yards across the country at the same time. Stay after to enjoy a vegan BBQ, served taking every COVID precaution! REGISTER AS, OR SPONSOR, A PARTICIPANT To raise our goal of $4,500 we need your support. *&nbsp; Promote &nbsp;&ndash; print and distribute&nbsp;flyers and posters to friends and local businesses, your doctor&rsquo;s office, laundromat, food co-op, wealthy benefactor, et cetera. *&nbsp; Run/walk/bike/roll &nbsp;in the 5k &ndash; We need participants who can run/walk/bike/roll the 5k and are able to collect financial pledges to offer as donations to the run. Download the brochure, complete with registration and sponsor form&nbsp; right here . *&nbsp; Volunteer &nbsp;for the run &ndash; We need folks who are willing to promote the run and bike the route as street medics. *&nbsp; Donate online &nbsp;at venmo @nycabc *&nbsp; Donate &nbsp;to the run/sponsor a participant &ndash; If you are not able to attend, but want to support this fundraising effort, please mail donations to: NYC ABC Post Office Box 110034 Brooklyn, New York 11211 Your donation of $20 or more entitles you to the celebratory picnic after the event. Each year, we split proceeds between the Anarchist Black Cross Federation&rsquo;s&nbsp; Warchest Program and a local organization. This year, local funds are going to the legal defense for Priscilla Grim . The Warchest Program: The Anarchist Black Cross Federation (ABCF) has initiated a program designed to send monthly checks to those Political Prisoners and Prisoners of War who have been receiving insufficient, little, or no financial support during their imprisonment. The Warchest program was initiated in November 1994. Its purpose is to collect monthly funds from groups and individual supporters, and send that money to Political Prisoners and Prisoners of War (PP/POW) via monthly checks. From its inception, the ABCF warchest has dispensed over $235,000 to political prisoners. Currently, there are 13 imprisoned comrades who receive a monthly stipend as part of the program; they are Abdul Azeez , Alex Stokes , Hanif Bey , Jamil Al-Amin , Jessica Reznicek , Joe-Joe Bowen , Kamau Sadiki, Peppy , Malik Smith , Marius Mason , Oso Blanco , Ronald Reed, and Xinachtli &nbsp;(FKA Alvaro Luna Hernandez) . Priscilla Grim Legal Defense : In August 2023, an unprecedented indictment against 61 individuals involved with Stop Cop City was launched&ndash; the largest political RICO trial in U.S. history. This sweep- ing and punitive move targets folks associated with the movement to Stop Cop City&mdash;a militarized police training compound planned for Atlanta&rsquo;s Weelaunee Forest, including Priscilla Grim, a long-time cultural worker and media organizer. supportpriscilla.org For more info and location go here .