---
title: "Call for Agitation for the Absolute Freedom of Miguel Peralta and the Community of Eloxochitlán de Flores Magón"
author: "It's Going Down"
source: "It's Going Down"
url: "https://itsgoingdown.org/call-for-agitation-for-the-absolute-freedom-of-miguel-peralta/"
---

Communique from the support group of Miguel Peralta calling for solidarity actions and agitation during the months of September- November of this year.&nbsp; To the Independent Media To the Anarchist and Autonomous Individuals, Collectives, and Movements To the Art Collectives and Different Artistic Expressions For more than ten years, the situation in the community of Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n, in the Sierra Mazateca de Oaxaca, Mexico, has drawn the attention of those who believe in the autonomy of Indigenous communities and the defense of territory as something legitimate and necessary. For more than a decade we have witnessed the tireless struggle of the Mazatec people against local power holders&mdash;caciques and officials of the governmental apparatus&mdash;who have not ceased in their assault on the community and theft of the natural resources. Within this struggle, our compa&ntilde;ero Miguel Peralta&mdash;Mazatec anarchist and community organizer&mdash;has been one of the many community members who has faced stiff state repression. He was imprisoned in Cuicatl&aacute;n, Oaxaca, for nearly five years and is currently being persecuted by the state, separated from his family, his territory, and his community. Although Miguel Peralta is not the only case of political persecution in the community, his legal defense and judicial process have taken a different pathway than the rest of the persecuted companerxs. Today, we are at a critical moment in the struggle for the absolute freedom of Miguel Peralta. After his case was taken up by the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation in 2023&mdash;with the possibility of ending once and for all the political persecution against him and ordering his absolute freedom&mdash;in November 2024 the Supreme Court emitted a resolution returning the case to the collegiate court in Oaxaca. This ruling was limited to vague recommendations made to the collegiate court in Oaxaca, ordering them to &ldquo;review the case from an intercultural perspective taking into account the cultural specificities of the Mazatec community of Eloxochitl&aacute;n,&rdquo; and to study whether the rights of self-determination and autonomy were respected throughout the legal process. This order of course comes from authorities who are part of the same structure of power, passing on the responsibility to other authorities, leading us to believe that while it is true that the intercultural perspective was ignored throughout this case, taking it into account does not guarantee that this time it will result in a favorable decision for our compa&ntilde;ero Miguel Peralta. A serious study of the case file would undoubtedly result in the absolute freedom of Miguel Peralta. However, we know the political power of those responsible for the persecution and criminalization in Eloxochitl&aacute;n: the cacique-political party family of Zepeda, specifically the head cacique and ex-municipal president, Manuel Zepeda Cortes, and his daughter, Elisa Zepeda Lagunas, who is currently a member of the state congress in Oaxaca for the political party MORENA. We know the influence that Elisa Zepeda has in the courts and tribunals. We know the relations that she maintains with the governor of the state of Oaxaca, Salom&oacute;n Jara, with the president of the republic, Claudia Sheinbaum, and now even with the new president of the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation, Hugo Aguilar Ortiz. We know that, regardless of the political party in power and the discourse they maintain, the state constantly seeks to repress the self-determination of Indigenous communities. In addition to the case of Miguel Peralta, there are active arrest warrants for more than 50 members of the community of Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n, among them Martha Betanzos and Martin Peralta (mother and brother of Miguel). All of these orders have been perpetrated by the same cacique family and backed up by the nefarious system of justice. It has not been enough for the Zepeda family to hold positions of power and use them to subjugate the community; they want to continue keeping entire families displaced and living in fear of one day being arrested. In April of this year, David Peralta, the younger brother of Miguel Peralta and a photojournalist in the community, was taking photos of the exploitation and plunder of the natural resources carried out by the Zepeda family business, when he was attacked and threatened by Manuel Zepeda and one of his workers. David was robbed of his photography equipment, physically attacked, and accused of being on private property. This is totally false. For all of the above, we call on everyone to show their solidarity and participate in these months of agitation for the absolute freedom of Miguel Peralta. We encourage people to carry out activities between the months of September and November of this year 2025, including agitation and action in its various forms and modalities, using whatever imagination and tools we have at our disposal: drawings, poems, music, banners, graphics, dance, letters, events, and actions. We also invite folks to be attentive to coming actions, and to disseminate information about the case by all means possible. It is a crucial moment for the state to once and for all order the absolute freedom of Miguel Peralta so that he can return to walk the streets, pathways, mountains, canyons, and coffee fields of his community. End the political persecution against Indigenous people! Absolute freedom for Miguel Peralta! Freedom and justice for Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n! Neither condemned, nor persecuted! &nbsp; Support Group in Solidarity with Miguel Peralta Friends of Miguel Peralta and People in Solidarity with the Community of Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n &nbsp; Share your proposals and/or actions at: Email:&nbsp; yalibreselox@riseup.net FB: Libres Ya IG: Libres.ya Llamado a la Agitaci&oacute;n por la Libertad Absoluta de Miguel Peralta y el pueblo de Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n A los medios libres A lxs compa&ntilde;erxs anarquistas, libres y aut&oacute;nomxs A las colectivas y colectivos de gr&aacute;fica y distintas expresiones art&iacute;sticas Desde hace m&aacute;s de 10 a&ntilde;os la situaci&oacute;n que se vive en el pueblo de Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n, en la sierra mazateca de Oaxaca, M&eacute;xico, ha llamado la atenci&oacute;n de quienes asumimos la autonom&iacute;a de los pueblos y la defensa de territorio como algo leg&iacute;timo y necesario. Desde hace m&aacute;s de una d&eacute;cada hemos sido testigxs de la lucha incansable del pueblo mazateco contra los poderes locales que se refuerzan como caciques y como parte de la estructura gubernamental quienes no han cesado tampoco en el robo y el asalto a la comunidad. Dentro de esa lucha nuestro hermano Miguel Peralta, mazateco, anarquista y defensor comunitario, ha sido uno de lxs muchxs que ha recibido duramente la represi&oacute;n. Pas&oacute; casi 5 a&ntilde;os preso en el penal de Cuicatl&aacute;n y actualmente se encuentra perseguido y alejado de su familia su territorio y su comunidad. Si bien no es el &uacute;nico caso del pueblo, su defensa legal ha tenido un camino distinto al del resto de lxs compa&ntilde;erxs perseguidxs. Hoy nos encontramos en un momento cr&iacute;tico en la lucha por la libertad absoluta de Miguel Peralta. &nbsp;Tras la llegada del caso a la Suprema Corte de Justicia en el pasado 2023, y con una posibilidad anulada de poder poner fin a la persecuci&oacute;n pol&iacute;tica y otorgarle su libertad plena, la Suprema Corte de Justicia se limit&oacute; a emitir una resoluci&oacute;n en noviembre de 2024 en el que el caso fue devuelto al Primer Tribunal Colegiado de Oaxaca, limit&aacute;ndose &uacute;nicamente hacer recomendaciones vagas a dicho tribunal bajo el argumento de &ldquo;revisar el caso con una perspectiva intercultural y tomando en cuenta especificidades culturales de la comunidad ind&iacute;gena mazateca de Eloxochitl&aacute;n&rdquo;, as&iacute; mismo, recomend&oacute; estudiar si se hab&iacute;an respetado los derechos a la libre determinaci&oacute;n y la autonom&iacute;a en este caso. Todo esto dicho por las autoridades obviamente dentro de la misma mara&ntilde;a que cede la bolita de la responsabilidad a otras instancias, nos llev&oacute; a una parte del proceso que, si bien es cierto que se ignor&oacute; toda esta perspectiva intercultural que ahora se se&ntilde;ala, el hacerlo no nos garantiza que esta vez resulte de forma favorable para nuestro hermano Miguel Peralta. Un estudio serio del expediente resultar&iacute;a sin duda en la libertad absoluta de Miguel, sin embargo, conocemos el poder pol&iacute;tico de los responsables de la persecuci&oacute;n y criminalizaci&oacute;n en Eloxochitl&aacute;n: la familia caciquil-partidista Zepeda, espec&iacute;ficamente el cacique m&aacute;ximo y ex presidente municipal &nbsp;Manuel Zepeda Cortes y su hija Elisa Zepeda Lagunas, actualmente diputada por Morena en el Congreso del Estado de Oaxaca. Sabemos la influencia que &nbsp;esta &uacute;ltima tiene en los juzgados y tribunales, sabemos de las relaciones que mantiene con el gobernador del estado de Oaxaca, Salom&oacute;n Jara, con la presidenta de la rep&uacute;blica, Claudia Sheinbaum &nbsp;y ahora incluso con el nuevo presidente de la Suprema Corte de Justicia de la Naci&oacute;n, Hugo Aguilar Ortiz. Sabemos que, independientemente del partido pol&iacute;tico que est&eacute; en el poder y su discurso, el Estado busca reprimir la autodeterminaci&oacute;n de las comunidades ind&iacute;genas. Adem&aacute;s del caso de Miguel Peralta, existen muchas &oacute;rdenes de aprensi&oacute;n en contra de m&aacute;s de 50 integrantes de la comunidad de Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n, entre ellas Martha Betanzos y Mart&iacute;n Peralta (madre y hermano de Miguel), todas perpetradas por la misma familia caciquil y respaldadas por el sistema nefasto de justicia. No les ha bastado con estar en puestos de poder y utilizarlos para someter a la comunidad, quieren seguir manteniendo a familias enteras desplazadas y bajo la angustia de un d&iacute;a ser detenidas. El &nbsp;pasado mes de abril, David Peralta, hermano menor &nbsp;de Miguel y fotoperiodista de la localidad, se &nbsp;encontraba ejerciendo su labor de &nbsp;documentaci&oacute;n &nbsp;a trav&eacute;s del registro fotogr&aacute;fico de la explotaci&oacute;n y saqueo &nbsp;de los recursos &nbsp;naturales de la comunidad por la empresa familiar de &nbsp;los &nbsp; Zepeda, David fue &nbsp;atacado y amenazado por Manuel Zepeda y su personal, quienes le robaron sus herramientas &nbsp;de trabajo y lo persiguieron violentamente argumentando que se encontraba &nbsp;en &ldquo;propiedad privada&rdquo;, lo que era &nbsp;totalmente falso. Por todo esto les convocamos a solidarizarse y sumarse a la Jornada de Agitaci&oacute;n por la Libertad Absoluta de Miguel Peralta Betanzos. Sugerimos realizarse actividades entre los meses de septiembre a noviembre de este a&ntilde;o 2025, enti&eacute;ndase agitaci&oacute;n y acci&oacute;n en sus diversas formas y modalidades, con lo que la propia imaginaci&oacute;n y herramientas nos permita, dibujos, poemas, m&uacute;sica, mantas, gr&aacute;fica, danza, cartas, eventos y acciones, todo en solidaridad con Miguel Peralta y la comunidad de Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n, exigiendo una vez m&aacute;s su LIBERTAD ABSOLUTA. As&iacute; mismo, les invitamos a estar atentes a las acciones pr&oacute;ximas y difundir el caso por todos los medios posibles. Es un momento crucial para que la Justicia del Estado dicte sentencia de libertad absoluta a Miguel Peralta y &eacute;l pueda volver a caminar por las calles, senderos, monta&ntilde;as, ca&ntilde;ones y cafetales de su comunidad. &iexcl;Alto a la persecuci&oacute;n de las comunidades originarias! &iexcl;Libertad absoluta para Miguel Peralta! &iexcl;Libertad y Justicia para Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n! &iexcl;Ni condenadxs! &iexcl;Ni perseguidxs! &nbsp; Grupo de Apoyo en Solidaridad con Miguel Peralta Amigxs de Miguel Peralta y personas solidarias con la comunidad de Eloxochitl&aacute;n de Flores Mag&oacute;n &nbsp; Comparte tus propuestas y/o acciones a: Correo:&nbsp; yalibreselox@riseup.net FB: Libres Ya IG: Libres.ya &nbsp;