---
title: "Announcing the Denver Anarchist Zine Fest"
author: "It's Going Down"
source: "It's Going Down"
url: "https://itsgoingdown.org/announcing-the-denver-anarchist-zine-fest/"
---

Announcing the Denver Anarchist Zine Fest on August 31st. For more info, go here .&nbsp; Please join us in the mile-high, sanctuary city that is aching for liberation. On this day we wish to foster conversations and activities that promote: healing, appreciation, awareness, preparedness, and relationships unique and common to all of our struggles. There will be more than 20 tables of anarchist and other zines, as well as seven workshops and talks. Schedule 11:30 &ndash; Ikce Wicasa: Rematriating Ways, Seeding Futures on stolen land 12pm &ndash; Dani (Boulder Food Not Bombs): Building New Worlds 1pm &ndash; Angel H.H.: Obstacles of being a bipoc felon in the transgender community 2pm &ndash; Molly/Molecule (FoCo Street Medics): Decolonizing Therapy 3pm &ndash; Self-Defense Techniques 4pm &ndash; Alexei Wood: Lessons on antifascist and anti-capitalist resistance at DC inauguration 2017 5pm &ndash; Eric King (Bread and Roses Law): Why prison support is necessary in the fight against fascism 6pm &ndash; Cripple Punk Alliance: How to create inclusive events The Anarchist Zine Fest is free, open to everyone, and all ages. Accessibility Over half of the tables will be at ground level. Some tables and most presentations will be on the basement level which is only accessible by stairs. There will be a live stream of the talks and workshops at the event if requested and only with permission of the presenter. Designated area for children but no supervision services. ASL services available upon request. Some literature will be in Spanish, but no translation services. Logistics Plenty of parking with free lots close by. Mutiny sells some food and drinks. Local eating establishments abound including a vegan restaurant next door. Mutual aid bin on site for needs or donations. Plus a table of free goods. Masks strongly encouraged and will be provided by COVID Safe Colorado. Sunday, August 31 from 11am &ndash; 7pm Mutiny Information Cafe 3483 S Broadway in Englewood, CO For questions or concerns contact: anarchistzinefair@proton.me