---
title: "Zines Are Not a Crime!: Free Des Revol"
author: "It's Going Down"
source: "It's Going Down"
url: "https://itsgoingdown.org/zines-are-not-a-crime-free-des-revol/"
---

Call to support Des Revol in Dallas-Fort Wroth, TX. For more information, go here . Des Revol &mdash;a tattoo artist, PoC anarchist, immigrant, and all-around sweetheart&mdash;is currently facing serious charges related to a larger case of political repression in Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas. But Des isn&rsquo;t just a victim of trumped-up political prosecution, he&rsquo;s a beloved artist and friend who loves nothing more than experimenting with new vegan recipes, digging into new books, looking at baby opossums and sometimes fostering them, and spending time with loved ones. As a longtime vegan dedicated to animal liberation, solidarity with nonhumans shows up in much of Des&#700;s artwork, including through his playful depictions of raccoons, cats, and other critters. Des extends this deep solidarity outward: he&#700;s a loving brother, son, and friend; he&rsquo;s a free-spirited dreamer who takes good care of everyone and everything around him. Now stuck in a federal prison, Des is continuing to lend solidarity by drawing pictures for other inmates to send to their families. Des makes a mean vegan posole. The first time I met Des, he was cheffing it up in the kitchen and literally exploded red chile everywhere in a brand-new apartment LMAO! &mdash;Kourtney Des did my first five tattoos ever. He&rsquo;s the only artist I would go to, due to his comforting and inviting nature. He remembered me every time, despite his busy schedule. Every session, we would share lighthearted conversations, mostly about his love for possums haha. He&rsquo;s one of the best people I&rsquo;ve ever met. My mom has also been tattooed by him. He&rsquo;s always been an inspiration to us. &mdash;Emma Grace When I met Des, we were in a place that felt like the middle of nowhere. And his presence felt so warm and kind and open. His smile at times would literally light up a room&mdash;so powerful, I can still feel it. I remember his kindness, which manifested in so many ways&mdash;offering beautiful tattoos to people with such patience and care, sharing laughs and stories, sharing his artwork. And offering a truly present ear. When I think of the term &ldquo;holding space,&rdquo; Des comes to mind. It is one of his many gifts. Just sitting next to him felt like a warm hug. &mdash;Sayyida I just want all the kitties and vegan donuts. -Des B ACKGROUND On July 4, 2025, around a dozen people gathered outside the ICE Prairieland Detention Center in Alvarado, Texas, for a noise demo in solidarity with immigrants and ICE detainees inside. At some point, an altercation allegedly occurred, after which an officer claimed to have sustained a minor injury. Ten people were arrested, and state and federal police then charged them with terrorism and attempted murder. Since then, another seven people have been arrested in connection with this case. The police have also terrorized friends and family members of those arrested at the protest, serving no-knock warrants, conducting house raids, and engaging in widespread surveillance. Des was not at the noise demo. Instead, on July 6th, after receiving a phone call from his wife in jail (one of the initial ten who were arrested), Des was followed and arrested by the FBI in Denton, Texas&mdash;at first, under the pretext of a minor traffic violation. He was later charged with evidence tampering and obstruction of justice related to the Prairieland defendants. This allegation was based on a box of zines that he was supposedly moving in his truck&mdash;zines that could be found in any collective house or infoshop. Des was briefly held at the Johnson County Jail, but soon transferred to a federal prison, FMC Fort Worth. He is also currently on an ICE hold, and has been publicly targeted and doxxed on social media by both prominent fascists and ICE. Moreover, right after his arrest, his family experienced a brutal and intimidating nine-hour FBI raid of their home. Police confiscated everything from electronics to stickers and more zines. While Des is not being charged along with the other Prairieland defendants, his charges are tied to them. He is cited in all the other defendants&rsquo; indictments so far for alleged evidence tampering, and the state has included a photo of the supposedly incriminating box of zines. But his case will look different and is separate from the others, and he may be the only defendant who is at direct risk from ICE. Indeed, Des is not just at risk of a lengthy federal prison sentence, which is bad enough. Even if released, he is in danger of being kidnapped by ICE and/or assaulted by fascists. The framing of the case by the federal government should worry all of us. It is a thinly veiled attempt to crack down on resistance, whether in deed or word. The criminalization of dissent&mdash;alongside solidarity and even ideas&mdash;means that everyone risks arrest and worse as the state moves to assert authoritarian power. Resistance, including zines, is not a crime. WRITE TO DES Daniel Rolando Sanchez Estrada #95099-511 FMC Fort Worth Federal Medical Center PO Box 15330 Fort Worth, Texas 76119 REMINDER: Des is pretrial. DO NOT mention anything&nbsp;about the case or charges. FREE DES RESOURCES Instagram @free-des-revol, @dfwsupportcommittee 2.5&Prime; Zines Are Not a Crime buttons:&nbsp; https://archive.org/details/not-a-crime-buttons &#8203;&#8203;&#8203;&#8203;&#8203;&#8203;&#8203; 1 Sheet Free Des Zine:&nbsp; https://archive.org/details/free-des-zine Photo by Loan on Unsplash