---
title: "IGD: 2015 – 2025"
author: "It's Going Down"
source: "It's Going Down"
url: "https://itsgoingdown.org/igd-2015-2025/"
---

About a year ago, we announced a hiatus on this project. Due to an outpouring of support, we pushed ourselves to continue, and over the last year, we&rsquo;re proud of the interviews and roundups we&rsquo;ve been able to produce . But as events in the United States have continued to escalate and conditions have grown more dire, it&rsquo;s clear that IGD does not have the capacity to meet the moment as a hub for grassroots reporting and journalism. In the face of this reality, we feel its important to be clear about our inability to continue, in the hopes that more people can push themselves to build and grow media projects and platforms. We should all have a sober and clear-eyed view of what is happening. The current administration is attempting to consolidate extreme authoritarian power. People are being silenced and working-class people are being attacked. A police state is being constructed. Conditions are worsening. Inflation and prices are exploding and the entire country feels like it is slipping into dictatorship and economic collapse, as most people struggle to put food on the table. While this reality is bleak, we are excited about the flood of new media projects taking off and reporting from the ground level and covering evolving social movements. We want to take a moment to shout out some of these projects and encourage you to support and follow them: It Could Happen Here Unraveled The Wreckage The Final Straw The Dugout The Beautiful Idea Live Like the World is Dying CrimethInc. TruthOut Feel the News Freedom News Green and Red Podcast SubMedia We Will Free Us Left Coast Right Watch As corporations and the State consolidate news into fewer hands and the far-Right pushes to silence those who speak out, the need for dynamic and vibrant grassroots media that amplifies working-class voices and gives a platform to social movements is needed now more than ever. We hope those that enjoyed IGD over the years can help in constructing new infrastructure that can help meet our present moment.